 Less than a year after a watered-down version of the bill was finally forced through the assembly, Mr Macron launched En Marche! in his home town of Amiens, in the Somme region of northern France.
 Fully half of them say they could vote for Mr Melenchon, Ms Le Pen, or one of the minor fringe candidates-a cause of deep concern for other European countries, since both Mr Melenchon and Ms Le Pen want, in effect, to break up the EU. Ms Le Pen, Mr Macron, Mr Fillon and Mr Melenchon all have a shot at getting through Sunday's first round.
 Mr Macron, if he makes it through, appears a strong favourite; whoever she meets in the second round, Ms Le Pen looks highly likely to lose.
 "It's the first time that a candidate is offering something different, something positive," says a retired tax inspector at a Macron rally in Angers, a cathedral town in western France.
 While Mr Macron is trying to mobilise the France that still waves Europe's flag at rallies, two other candidates are harnessing the howl of rage against it, and the political establishment more generally.
 On Syrian refugees Mr Melenchon and Mr Macron stand together, urging France to be more welcoming; Mr Fillon and Ms Le Pen would keep the door shut.
 The only two candidates with no position in common are Mr Macron and Ms Le Pen.
 Generation Libre, a liberal think-tank, gives Mr Fillon and Mr Macron a 60% "Liberal" rating: all the other candidates get less than 34%. Mr Macron and Mr Fillon agree on a basic premise: that, over the past ten years, France has lost economic ground to Germany that it must regain.
 Mr Macron would keep it as it is and concentrate on a longer term but, he claims, deeper reform which the Fillon team sees as unrealistic: unifying France's anemone-like pension system, made up of 35 different public regimes, into a single structure with universal transparent rules.
 In France Mr Melenchon and Ms Le Pen have been the preferred candidates of the under 25s, though polls now show Ms Le Pen losing ground and Mr Macron rising fast.
