 It should be voluntary WHAT would Gandhi have made of Aadhaar, the ambitious scheme to provide each of India's 1.3bn residents with a unique, biometrically verifiable identification? There is much that might have impressed the great pacifist.
 Before Aadhaar's launch in 2010, many Indians had no proof of identity that could be recognised across the sprawling, multilingual country; now 99% of adults do.
 Aadhaar could scarcely be further removed in intent from colonial racism: it is designed to include and unite, not exclude.
 In recent months the government of Narendra Modi, the prime minister, has made access to a dozen government programmes contingent on possession of an Aadhaar card.
 In answer to a question in parliament about whether the state was, in effect, forcing citizens into the Aadhaar scheme, the reply from India's minister of finance was blunt: "Yes, we are." This would appear to contradict India's Supreme Court.
 Its judges have yet to rule on a score of petitions aimed at stopping Aadhaar, but in the past two years the court has issued several statements asserting that the identity scheme should be voluntary-or at any rate that it should remain so until the court decides otherwise.
 In theory, the law on Aadhaar passed last year by Mr Modi's government includes stringent protections against the sharing of information; its rules allowing exceptions on grounds of national security, although vaguely worded, appear well intended.
 By sneaking the linkage between Aadhaar and tax into a budget bill, it raises concerns about intent: will the government stalk tax evaders, or perhaps enemies of the state, using ostensibly "Fire-walled" Aadhaar data? Many Indians will remember that, following sectarian riots in the past, ruling parties were accused of using voter rolls to target victims.
 Mr Modi, who before taking office dismissed Aadhaar as a "Political gimmick", has been right to seize on its potential to transform India.
 For Aadhaar to fulfil its potential, Indians must trust that it will not be misused.
