 Full Text: Dosing pregnant mice with penicillin changes their offsprings' behaviour THE symbiosis between human beings and the bacteria dwelling in their guts is a delicate thing.
 There is evidence, from experiments on mice, that an absence of gut flora affects the development of the brain.
 The experiments which show these brain and behavioural changes have either been done on mice raised in sterile conditions or on ones that have had their alimentary bacterial ecosystems "Nuked" with antibiotics in high dose-far higher, pro rata, than would be administered to a human for medical reasons.
 Dr Leclercq and her colleagues, who have just published their results in Nature Communications, laced the drinking water of some pregnant female mice with medically appropriate levels of penicillin, starting a week before those females were due to give birth, and carrying on three weeks after birth, to the point where their offspring were weaned.
 A second had a bacterium called Lactobacillus rhamnosus, a so-called probiotic that has been demonstrated experimentally to be good for the intestinal health of mice, added as well.
 Those mice born of mothers given both penicillin and Lactobacillus fell between these extremes, averaging a bit under four and a half minutes in the chamber that gave them company, and three and three-quarters in the empty one.
 Dr Leclercq got similar results when she tested the preferences of her mice for social novelty.
 When Dr Leclercq and her colleagues killed and examined their animals shortly after the behavioural tests, they expected to see permeable blood-brain barriers in the mice exposed to penicillin.
 They actually saw the reverse: the blood-brain barriers of mice exposed solely to penicillin were far less permeable than those of the other two groups.
 Dr Leclercq and her colleagues have demonstrated that medically relevant doses of penicillin, even when administered via the mother rather than directly, can have palpable effects on young mice.
