 Full Text: A gesture Moon may soon be repeating Moon Jae-in lost the presidency to Park Geun-hye.
 Her ruin may be his redemption "MY BEST quality is that I am persistent. My worst is that I am no fun." Moon Jae-in's assessment of himself in "South Korea Asks", a series of interviews published in January, is one with which many South Koreans, whether they like or loathe him, would probably agree.
 The country now faces a snap presidential election on May 9th. After almost a decade of conservative rule, the ballot looks likely to be a victory for the more socially liberal Minjoo party: its support is the highest it has ever been, at 50%. Mr Moon, who led the party until January last year, has topped the polls for president for almost three months.
 Mr Moon is well ahead. And in the election proper, it is hard to imagine Mr Moon's opponents coalescing with enough enthusiasm around one of the other candidates to deny him the presidency.
 In a recent televised debate among the Minjoo candidates, Mr Moon said he would be a "Gwanghwamun president", referring to the district in the centre of Seoul where millions rallied over five months to demand Ms Park's dismissal.
 Mr Moon says he would do away with the presidential guard, making do with protection from the police instead. Before her impeachment, Ms Park refused to co-operate with the prosecutors; after it, she appeared to rebuke the constitutional court by saying the truth would "Eventually be known".
 The groundswell against Ms Park has dampened the influence of conservative media outlets; their attacks on Mr Moon have had little impact.
 Many on the right continue to associate Mr Moon with Roh, his liberal mentor and a beacon for South Korea's left.
 Mr Moon says he would visit North Korea before any other country if he thought it would help negotiations, and wants to re-open the Kaesong industrial complex, a joint manufacturing facility on the border that had been the last point of co-operation between the two governments until Ms Park shut it in 2016.
 In much the same vein, Mr Moon says he wants to overcome South Korea's regional divisions.
