 Full Text: Not quite what Madison had in mind Not quite what Madison had in mind Not quite what Madison had in mind THE morning after Donald Trump was elected president, Eric Schneiderman, the Democratic attorney-general of New York, summoned his raddled senior lawyers to a war council.
 While the president-elect was digesting his victory in Trump Tower, five miles up the road, Mr Schneiderman put scores of the 650 lawyers at his disposal on Trump watch.
 With the Republicans who control Congress apparently unwilling to hold Mr Trump to account, Mr Schneiderman feared that Democratic attorneys-general might have to act as a thin blue line of resistance to an authoritarian president.
 According to the fact-checkers at the Washington Post, Mr Trump uttered 317 "False or misleading" statements in his first 63 days as president.
 The failure of the Republicans in the House of Representatives on March 24th to pass a health-care bill on which Mr Trump had staked his image as America's closer-in-chief shows that the president cannot carry all before him.
 The 30-odd right-wingers, known as the House Freedom Caucus, who opposed the repeal bill, causing Paul Ryan, the Republican Speaker of the House, to withdraw it, intended no rebuke to Mr Trump.
 The president impugned the legitimacy of the first obstructive beak, James Robart-a George W. Bush appointee whom Mr Trump described as a "So-called judge".
 Though Mr Trump is sometimes compared to the White House's last big rule breaker, Richard Nixon, he appears much less competent.
 If an FBI investigation into the Russia connection turned up something serious, a Republican congress would still be loth to impeach Mr Trump.
 As the Washington Post has reported, he has spent almost a third of his time as president at a Trump-branded property, including his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida, where club members have been treated to the sight of the president urgently discussing North Korean missile launches over salad. Because another of his presidential haunts, the Trump International hotel, a short walk along Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House, is also popular with foreign dignitaries, Mr Trump has been sued over an obscure clause of the constitution that forbids public servants from accepting fees or gifts from a foreign state.
