Full Text: 
  America is gearing up for another debate over network neutrality

  THE details around network neutrality, the principle that
internet-service providers (ISPs) must treat all sorts of web traffic
equally, can be mind-numbingly abstruse. But they fuel passion, nonetheless.
After Tom Wheeler, a former chairman of America's Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), proposed unpopular net-neutrality rules in late 2014, for
instance, protesters blocked his driveway, forcing him to walk to work. Their
action was meant to illustrate the threat of big ISPs erecting toll-booths
and other choke-points that would relegate less well-off consumers to digital
slow lanes.

  Now it is the turn of Ajit Pai (pictured), Mr Wheeler's
successor, to stir the hornets' nest. In the coming days Mr Pai is
expected to unveil a proposal for new rules on net neutrality. His plan is
anticipated to be a testament both to his deregulatory agenda and to the big
ISPs' lobbying power. It would essentially take the FCC out of the
equation when it comes to policing the smooth running of the internet.

  Because of the protests in 2014 and because of a court decision
that year suggesting that the FCC needed the jurisdiction to be able to
mandate net-neutrality rules, Mr Wheeler reclassified internet access as a
"telecommunications service" to be under Title II of the
Telecommunications Act, meaning that ISPs are regulated as utilities. It is
this change that Mr Pai has vowed to undo: he considers the FCC's new
dominion over ISPs as regulatory overkill.

  Mr Pai does support general rules to protect net neutrality. Like
other advocates of the principle, he credits these for the internet's
innovativeness. But he believes that light-touch regulation is enough. Once
ISPs are no longer classed as telecommunications services he wants them to
commit to net neutrality in their terms of service. This commitment would (in
theory) be enforced by a different agency, the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC), which has the authority to go after firms if they fail to live up to
promises they make to customers.

  Yet the ISPs' commitments would, at bottom, be voluntary, as
critics such as Chris Lewis of Public Knowledge, an advocacy group, note.
ISPs could refuse to make promises on net neutrality, or abandon them down
the line. If they did break promises, it is unclear how vigorously the FTC
would go after them. It has less expertise in network engineering, for
example, so is much less well equipped to enforce the rules. And Mr Pai may
risk going too far even for his own comfort on net neutrality. If he
reclassifies internet access, he finds himself in the same situation Mr
Wheeler was in: the FCC then has limited authority to intervene should things
go wrong.

  The logical answer to this legal conundrum would be for Congress
to add a statute on net neutrality to the Telecommunications Act, which
predates the rise of the internet. That is unlikely, given other legislative
priorities such as health care and corporate tax, but in a less partisan
universe, Republicans and Democrats would have little problem finding common
ground on the subject, says Kevin Werbach of Wharton, a business school at
the University of Pennsylvania.

  Such a compromise would also be in tune with how the debate about
net neutrality has evolved. Although they oppose internet access being
regulated under Title II, most ISPs, including big ones such as AT&T and
Verizon, have made their peace with net neutrality. The current rules have
had no discernible negative impact on the companies, notes Mr Werbach.
Investment in broadband networks may have fallen, as critics of the strict
net-neutrality rules predicted, but such swings are common in the telecoms
industry and there is no conclusive evidence that net neutrality is to blame
for the fall.

  Will Mr Pai's plans trigger widespread protests similar to
those in 2014? Mr Lewis of Public Knowledge expects that resistance will be
stronger still, but others are not so sure. Although big internet firms such
as Google, Netflix, Amazon and others have come out against his expected
proposals, their opposition seems less determined than it was three years
ago. Netflix, one of the fiercest defenders of net neutrality, says it is now
big enough to stand up for itself. Activists, for their part, may already be
weary from fighting Mr Trump's government on other fronts.

