Full Text: 
  After seven decades of hegemony in Asia, America now has to
accommodate an increasingly powerful China, says Dominic Ziegler. How will
the two countries manage that?

  THE LAST TIME China considered itself as powerful as it does
today, Abraham Lincoln was in the White House. At that time, and against the
mounting evidence of Western depredations, the emperor still clung to the
age-old belief that China ruled all under heaven, a world order unto itself.
It never had allies in the Western sense, just nations that paid tribute to
it in exchange for trade. Both China and "the outside countries",
he wrote to Lincoln, constitute "one family, without any
distinction".

  Today, after a century and a half that encompassed Western
imperial occupation, republican turmoil, the plunder of warlords, Japanese
invasion, civil war, revolutionary upheaval and, more recently, phenomenal
economic growth, China has resumed its own sense of being a great power. It
has done so in a very different world: one led by America. For three-quarters
of a century, America has been the hegemon in East Asia, China's
historical backyard.

  But now China is indisputably back. New towers have transformed
the skylines of even its farthest-flung cities. An ultra-modern network of
bullet trains has, in a few short years, shrunk a continent-sized country.
China's new power rests on a 20-fold increase in economic output since
the late 1970s, when pragmatic leaders set in train market-led reforms. Over
the same period the number of Chinese people living in extreme poverty, as
defined by the World Bank, has fallen to 80m, a tenth of what it used to be.
China is the world's biggest trading nation and its second-biggest
economy after America. There is hardly a country in the world to which it
does not matter, either as a source of consumer goods or as a destination for
commodities, capital goods and investment.

  On all these counts, China wants--and deserves--a greater role in
East Asia and in the global order. America has to make room for it. But the
task will require wisdom and a subtle balance of firmness and finesse on both
sides. A first indication of what to expect was on display at a summit
between Xi Jinping and Donald Trump on April 6th and 7th at Mar-a-Lago, the
American president's Florida golfing resort. Though little of substance
was discussed, Mr Trump hailed the bilateral relationship as
"outstanding" and Mr Xi declared there were "a thousand
reasons to get the China-US relationship right". Neither mentioned the
cruise-missile strike America had just launched against a Syrian air base.
Nor was there any talk of imminently imposing tariffs.

  For all the superficial bonhomie at the summit, the two countries
see things very differently. China's system of politics, both
bureaucratic and authoritarian, has helped economic development at home, but
is alien to American notions of democracy. American policymakers have
traditionally seen liberal democratic values and an emphasis on human rights
as factors that legitimise and strengthen the international order. Chinese
policymakers see them as Western conspiracies to foster the kind of colour
revolutions that brought down authoritarian former Soviet regimes, and might
attempt to do the same in China.

  Chinese strategists consider the country's rapidly
modernising armed forces as essential for protecting the sea lanes on which
its prosperity and security depend. They think a powerful navy is needed to
keep potential adversaries from China's shores and stop them from
grabbing Chinese-occupied islands. They also suspect that America's
massive military presence in the Asia-Pacific region is designed to check
China's rise.

  American strategists, by contrast, say their country must keep a
presence in the region because Chinese hard power unsettles America's
friends in East and South-East Asia. In the past few years China has
challenged Japan over the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands (which the
Chinese call the Diaoyu Islands), and carried out extensive construction
works to build bases and runways on disputed rocks and reefs in the South
China Sea. Those American strategists suspect China of wanting to turn the
vast sea into a Chinese lake; and, more broadly, of seeking dominance in East
Asia and overturning the existing order.

  A rock and a hard place

  America has long sought to prevent any one power having hegemony
in Asia, whereas China wants to keep potential adversaries far from its
shores. Somehow, they have to find a way of accommodating each other's
overarching goals, as Henry Kissinger explains in his classic book on
statecraft, "World Order". Peace hangs on the outcome.

  That peace cannot be taken for granted. In much of East Asia,
history is unfinished business. Taiwan, to which the Nationalist losers in
China's civil war fled in 1949, is a thriving and peaceful democracy.
Yet China's Communist Party sees its sacred mission as bringing Taiwan
back into the motherland's fold, and reserves the right to use force to
do so. American guardianship of the island is meant to ensure that China
never dares. But as Chinese might grows and American commitment appears to
wane, the room for miscalculation grows. Soon after his election Mr Trump
even seemed to be calling into question America's endorsement of the
"one-China policy"--China's insistence on the polite fiction
that Taiwan is part of China.

  A potentially more imminent flashpoint in the region is the Korean
peninsula, divided since the end of the second world war. North Korea, ruled
by a family mafia now in its third generation, has a broken economy and an
ill-trained army. But it has poured money into nuclear programmes that
threaten South Korea, unnerve Japan and before long will also pose a threat
to America. North Korea exasperates China's leaders, yet they feel they
must show solidarity to a former ally against America in the bloody war North
Korea launched in 1950. China would rather have a nuclear North Korea under
Kim Jong Un than a failed state sending millions of desperate refugees across
the Chinese border. Above all, it is troubled by the idea of a unified,
democratic Korea with American troops next door. At Mar-a-Lago, Mr Trump
asked Mr Xi for ideas to deal with the threat from North Korea, but his
missile strike in Syria made it clear that America might act alone against
the North. Handling Mr Kim's belligerence--and the regime's
eventual demise--will be a huge test of great-power co-operation.

  Yet conflict between China and America is not inevitable. Both
sides want to avoid it and can adjust accordingly. It helps that habits of
co-operation have become established over four decades of Chinese market
reforms, which could not have happened without American security guaranteeing
China's external environment. Theirs is the world's most important
bilateral economic relationship today, with combined annual trade adding up
to $600bn and investment in each other's economies totalling around
$350bn.

  China has no missionary zeal or ambitions to export revolution,
nor indeed any grave ideological misgivings about the current order, which it
resents chiefly because it does not have a greater say in running it.
Ensuring more of a role appears to be the chief mission of Mr Xi,
China's paramount leader since 2012. He has accrued more authority to
himself than any leader since the late Deng Xiaoping, and is now gingerly
putting forward a model for greater global leadership which party theorists
are starting to call the "China solution". At one level, this is
about practical matters, such as investing in Central Asia to reduce poverty.
At another, it is about opposing American dominance. China, Mr Xi told a
conference in February, should "guide international security"
towards a "more just and rational new world order". That kind of
language is redolent of the old imperial Chinese virtues. But whereas
China's previous experience of power was of ruling all under heaven, it
now has to accept being merely one great power among several. America, for
its part, has never had any experience of ceding as much influence and
authority as it may have to do to China in future.

  An already fraught relationship has become more so with Mr
Trump's election as president. For seven decades America's grand
strategy has rested upon three pillars: open trade, strong alliances and the
promotion of human rights and democratic values. It is not clear to
America's friends in Asia to what extent Mr Trump, with his disdain for
diplomatic process, a protectionist streak and a narrow "America
first" definition of the national interest, is prepared to uphold those
three pillars. As Michael Fullilove, head of the Lowy Institute, a think-tank
in Sydney, puts it, Mr Trump is "an unbeliever in the global liberal
order and a sceptic of alliances. And he has a crush on authoritarians."

  Mr Trump's victory came as a huge shock to China's
leaders. They hate unpredictability and would have much preferred Hillary
Clinton, the devil they knew. It also came at an inconvenient time for the
Chinese. Mr Xi is focusing on a crucial five-yearly Communist Party congress
later this year. He appears set on consolidating his grip on power, against a
backdrop of an unsettling credit bubble and economic growth that has slowed
sharply from a peak of 10% a year to just 6.5%.

  For the most part, China has concealed its alarm over Mr Trump
behind studied caution. "When you see 10,000 changes around you,"
Chinese leaders told Kevin Rudd, an Australian former prime minister and
China hand, citing one of their language's countless proverbs,
"ensure you yourself don't change." China's leaders have
decided to wait and see. But behind the scenes they have been trying hard to
influence Mr Trump, working mainly through his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, a
property developer with Chinese ties.

  The Chinese also soon grasped the new president's
transactional approach, prompting them to dispatch Jack Ma, the boss of
Alibaba, an e-commerce giant, to meet him. He promised that his firm would
generate 1m jobs in America. Soon afterwards trademark applications to
protect the Trump brand in China that had languished in the courts for years
were suddenly granted. Cause and effect are impossible to disentangle, but Mr
Trump has certainly toned down his pre-election anti-China rhetoric.

  Looking into the abyss

  Yet deep, abiding uncertainties about the two countries'
relationship remain, not least over trade, which for three decades has
underpinned relations between the two countries. Mr Trump appears to view
trade not as mutually beneficial to all parties but as a zero-sum game, and
gives short shrift to the post-war multilateral trading system. One of the
first things he did after coming to office was to cancel the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP), a free-trade agreement among 12 countries in the
Asia-Pacific region (though not China)--a big blow to America's economic
role in Asia.

  More broadly, the world view of some of Mr Trump's advisers
encompasses a Manichean expectation of conflict. They claim that China is so
set on strategic rivalry with America that military conflict is inevitable,
and argue that the best way to protect the national interest is to spend more
money on the armed forces and less on diplomacy. Such people do not have a
monopoly on the internal debate about America's strategic relationship
with China, any more than they do on trade. As  this special report went to
press, an alternative approach to trade, involving a robust multilateralism,
was gaining favour. Meanwhile James Mattis, the defence secretary, on his
first trip to Asia in early February urged care when challenging Chinese
construction in the South China Sea with military force, and emphasised the
primacy of diplomacy over military action in resolving differences.

  Mr Mattis, a well-rounded former general, is what
Washington's seasoned hands call one of the administration's
"grown-ups", but there are precious few of them. The secretary of
state, Rex Tillerson, a former oil boss, was counted among them, though
question marks have since been raised about his Asia diplomacy. And although
every new administration takes time to fill vacant posts, the gaps in the
Trump foreign-policy team, especially on the Asia desks, are alarming. Among
other things, almost all the Republican party's seasoned Asia hands, who
during the Obama years were working in think-tanks, universities or the
private sector, swore before the election that they would never serve under a
President Trump. Some have since swallowed their pride and moved closer to
the new administration, but Mr Trump's henchmen have long memories when
it comes to criticism of their boss.

  Many observers still hope that, once an unusually chaotic new
administration sorts itself out, it will revert to a policy that flows
recognisably from America's seven decades of experience in Asia. But
that is far from certain. Some of the administration's leading members
hold seemingly irreconcilable views on American policy in Asia. Perhaps that
reflects broader American disagreement about global roles and
responsibilities. Yet the president himself seems unaware of the lack of any
comprehensive strategy in Asia, and that problem may persist. A Republican
Asia hand who served under both Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush explains
that "I don't get a sense of a learning curve with Trump. So I
don't expect things to get any better."

  Amid all this uncertainty about Mr Trump's policy in Asia,
the two chief risks for the region appear almost contradictory. The first is
that, after an initial honeymoon with Chinese leaders, an increasingly
aggressive stand by the new administration raises Chinese hackles while
failing to reassure America's Asian friends. The second is that American
policy in Asia becomes half-hearted and disengaged, again unsettling Asian
friends and perhaps emboldening China. The consequences in either case might
be similar--shifting power dynamics that require rapid adjustments, risking
instability and even regional turmoil. Hope for the best, but prepare for
disorder under heaven.

