Full Text: 
  Yevgeny Yevtushenko, a Russian poet, died on April 1st, aged 83

  BABI YAR was the site of the most notorious massacre of the
Holocaust. But when Yevgeny Yevtushenko visited the ravine outside Kiev in
1961, he found no monument there to the nearly 34,000 victims, just lorries
dumping piles of stinking rubbish. He hurried away and wrote a poem, decrying
not only the Nazi executioners but also Soviet anti-Semitism and the amnesia
it fostered.

  The leaders of the tavern mob are ragingAnd they stink of vodka
and onions.Kicked aside by a boot, I lie helpless.In vain I plead with the
brutesAs voices roar:"Kill the Jews! Save Russia!"

  It was brave, heartfelt--and well-timed. Nikita Khrushchev's
thaw was breaking over the Soviet Union, and the previously unsayable was
being said. Dmitri Shostakovich set "Babi Yar" to the opening
movement of his 13th Symphony. Shamefaced Soviet Ukrainian bureaucrats closed
the tip and put up a modest memorial.

  To his fans, the episode epitomised the Yevtushenko they adored:
an idealist who spoke for his generation, a man whose humanism transcended
the cold war. They flocked in their tens of thousands to his readings of his
own and other writers' work, making him the rock-star poet of his age;
"Babi Yar", declaimed with elaborate intonation and vigorous hand
gestures, was a particular hit. His output was prodigious. His poetry books
sold in their millions, a privilege few Russian poets enjoyed. There were
novels and films too.

  His technique was honed and immaculate; as a teenager, he searched
for an unused rhyme for every Russian word. The results might lack subtlety,
but never impact. Even his critic Joseph Brodsky, a great Russian poet forced
into exile, said he knew hundreds of Mr Yevtushenko's lines by heart.
They were simple, even staccato, dealing with fresh, forthright ideas--love
and longing, memory and forgetting, pride and shame--delivered with utter
self-confidence and transparent enjoyment. The secret, he said, was "in
bridging the gap/Between the word and our hearts".

  Performance poet

  Charming (notably and insistently to women), inquisitive and
quick-tongued, he seemed a world away from the grey, stolid Soviet cultural
establishment. He was no golden child of the literary nomenklatura, but
rather a genuine product of communist meritocracy, born in Siberia in a
family savaged by Stalinist purges, who scrabbled his way to stardom by
penning verses for a sports newspaper.

  The cultural commissars preferred to keep such popular, restless
talents in a gilded cage, rather than banishing or jailing them. Only the
greatest resisted that embrace. He was not one of them.

  It helped that his style fitted unproblematically into the Soviet
poetical canon. Its content reflected the lively, even troublesome, spirit of
the post-Stalinist 1950s and 1960s, but even that could be tolerated, within
limits, especially as that toleration proved that the Soviet system was not
as monolithic as its critics claimed.

  It all made him an easy target for those who thought his
real-world stances should match the lofty ideals of his poetry. In 1987
Brodsky resigned from the American Academy in protest at Mr
Yevtushenko's honorary membership, complaining: "He throws stones
only in directions that are officially sanctioned and approved." Two
decades earlier, a campaign in Britain stymied his election to the Oxford
poetry professorship.

  The critics had a point. He bemoaned the Soviet system's
imperfections while mounting rose-tinted defences of its achievements and
wince-making attacks on the West. He baffled students in New York when he
defended a scandalous prosecution by asking: "How would you react if one
of your writers published a book in Europe under an assumed name?"

  His celebrity gave him clout, when he chose to use it. He chided
Khrushchev for his U-turn against cultural freedom and defended some victims
of persecution, including, in the 1960s, Brodsky--but not Boris Pasternak,
whose "Dr Zhivago", he said, was not worth publishing. He lamented
the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. But these protests were
within the system, not against it. Other writers, such as Alexander
Solzhenitsyn, focused discontent; he acted as its safety valve. His worst
punishments were expulsion from university for praising an anti-Stalinist
novel, or media scoldings by hardliners. After publishing an unsanctioned
autobiography abroad, he apologised grovelingly for his "irreparable
mistake". While he was enjoying the fruits of fame, political prisoners
were dying in labour camps.

  Despite his peacock dress sense and penchant for self-promotion,
he was a self-deprecating man who claimed no great bravery, let alone genius.
One of his novels dismissed his own work as a phase to be grown out of. His
admirers might overstate his merits; he did not.

  After 1991 his star waned. Post-Soviet Russia lost its taste for
performance poetry. He spent much of his time teaching, in the congenial but
unglamorous University of Tulsa, Oklahoma. One of his later poems mourned the
Czech philosopher-playwright Vaclav Havel, ending: "Who will tell us
what to do next?" Some of his counterparts needed nobody to tell them.

