Full Text: 
  The president gets his long-cherished constitution amid
allegations of vote-rigging

  IT WAS a vote that turned out to be as controversial as it was
hotly contested. Even before all of the ballots had been counted, Recep
Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey's president, stepped in front of a crowd of
supporters in Istanbul and proclaimed victory. "My nation stood upright
and undivided," he said, referring to the referendum on a constitution
that will give him new, virtually unchecked powers. "April 16th was a
victory for all of Turkey."

  Yet it was hardly the win Mr Erdogan had expected. The Yes camp,
which the president headed, limped away with just 51.4% of the vote. The
opposition accused the country's electoral authority of foul play.
Outside observers charged the government with stacking the odds in its
favour. Anti-government demonstrations broke out in a number of Turkish
cities. The country awoke the following morning more divided than ever.

  The new constitution will bring about the most radical overhaul of
the state since 1923, when it went from being an imperial Islamic power to a
secular republic under Kemal Ataturk, the founder of modern Turkey. After
fresh elections in 2019, Mr Erdogan will rule uncontested, appointing senior
officials, judges and members of his own cabinet, with little oversight by an
expanded but weakened parliament. The office of prime minister will cease to
exist.

  Yet the constitution is already mired in controversy. The main
opposition, the secular Republican People's party (CHP), has asked for
the referendum results to be annulled. A last-minute decision by the
country's electoral board to accept unstamped ballot papers created the
risk of mass fraud, the CHP said. Claims of vote-rigging, especially in the
Kurdish southeast, have been pouring in. In a scathing assessment, observers
from the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), an
intergovernmental body, said the board's move had "undermined an
important safeguard and contradicted the law". A state of emergency
imposed shortly after an attempted coup in July, accompanied by nearly 50,000
arrests and a climate of intimidation and nationalist hysteria, was hardly
the proper setting for a referendum on systemic changes. "Voters were
not provided with impartial information about key aspects of the reform and
limitations on fundamental freedoms had a negative effect," the OSCE
said.

  There is next to no chance of a recount. The electoral board
rejected the opposition's appeal on April 19th, but promised to look
into individual allegations of fraud. (Official results are expected towards
the end of April.) Mr Erdogan asked foreign observers to keep their concerns
to themselves. "We don't care about the opinions of
'Hans' or 'George'," he said. His prime minister
added: "The people's decision is clear and the result is a
Yes."

  The allegations will haunt Mr Erdogan for years, leaving the
country even more polarised than before. Mr Erdogan might be "the most
unassailable Turkish leader since Ataturk but this legitimacy issue will hang
over his head," says Soner Cagaptay, a fellow at the Washington
Institute.

  International reaction has been muted. Other than Donald
Trump's America, which joined model democracies such as Russia, Sudan,
Hungary and Djibouti in congratulating Mr Erdogan, no leader of a big Western
country has welcomed the vote. Britain, Germany and the EU called instead for
dialogue and an impartial inquiry. Mr Erdogan did not appear particularly
keen to rebuild bridges with Europe: on the day of the vote, he pledged once
again to do his part to reinstate the death penalty, which would threaten the
membership of Turkey in the Council of Europe and torpedo its already
comatose accession talks with the EU.

  One-man show

  Supporters of the new constitution say it will improve
decision-making by concentrating power in Mr Erdogan's hands, precluding
unwieldy political coalitions and neutralising powerful unelected officials.
"From now on, it's the people who are going to rule Turkey,"
says Ufuk, a young Yes voter relaxing outside a polling booth.

  Opponents say it will transform the government, already dominated
by Mr Erdogan, into an authoritarian regime. "This is the beginning of
one-man rule," says Ali Bayramoglu, a columnist who used to be
sympathetic to the ruling Justice and Development (AK) party. After he said
earlier this month that he would oppose the new constitution, Mr Bayramoglu
was assaulted by AK supporters at a polling station on the day of the vote.

  Some of the changes will come into effect immediately. An
impartiality clause that required the president to sever links with any
political party (which he flouted) will expire. Mr Erdogan is expected
formally to rejoin AK as soon as official results are announced this week.
Within a month, the country's most influential judicial body, the
council of judges and prosecutors, will shrink and move from a system of
election by peers to one of appointment by parliament and the president.

  Mr Erdogan's initial comments suggest he will disregard the
slim margin of victory and portray the referendum as a sign of support for
his crackdown. The day after the vote, his government extended the state of
emergency until July 19th. Two days after that, police arrested some 38
people accused of participating in protests.

  Turkey is saddled with a constitution opposed by nearly half of
all voters in a referendum tainted by fraud claims and held under conditions
that made open debate impossible. Mr Erdogan has the powers he has long
coveted. They come at the cost of tension at home and isolation abroad.

