Full Text: 
  Efforts to preserve EU citizenship for Britons seem doomed to fail

  MOST of those who regret Britain's decision to leave the
European Union now accept that Brexit is going to happen. But many are still
scrabbling for an escape hatch. The 1m-odd Britons living elsewhere in the EU
hope to have their residency rights confirmed early during the negotiations.
Anyone with an Irish grandparent can apply for Irish citizenship--and plenty
of people are. Marriage to an EU national is another trick, as is buying
Maltese or Cypriot citizenship (though the price is steep).

  The latest wheeze is to find a way to allow regretful Britons to
retain their EU membership on an individual basis. Guy Verhofstadt, a former
Belgian prime minister who is now the European Parliament's point man
for the Brexit negotiations, is promoting voluntary "associate EU
citizenship" for Britons, an idea first put forward by a fellow MEP from
Luxembourg, Charles Goerens. A paragraph in the parliament's resolution
on Brexit, adopted on April 5th, calls for some action to mitigate
Britons' loss of EU citizenship.

  The benefits of such citizenship include freedom to live, work and
travel around the 28-country union, to vote in European elections, to have
access to health care in other EU countries and to take part in Erasmus
student exchanges. Mr Verhofstadt's idea is that, after Brexit,
individual Britons should be allowed to retain most of these benefits,
possibly for an annual fee (though any suggestion that Britain might
reciprocate would fall on deaf ears).

  Yet as Adrienne Yong of the University of Hertfordshire argues, EU
citizenship is not something that can just be bought and sold. Article 20 of
the EU treaty, which created the concept, also makes clear that EU
citizenship is additional to, not in place of, national citizenship of a
member state. This means that a treaty change would be needed to confer EU
citizenship on any individual from a non-member country. Experience shows how
hard it is to agree upon and ratify any such change.

  So a few remainers have hit on another plan, which is to challenge
the government's right to take away their EU citizenship. They cite the
2010 Rottmann case, in which the European Court of Justice (ECJ) ruled that a
country (in this instance, Germany) could remove an individual's EU
citizenship only if its actions were "proportionate". Some talk of
using this precedent to justify pursuing a legal case against Brexit all the
way to the ECJ.

  No doubt lawyers can be found to take the case (so far lawyers are
doing well out of Brexit). Yet few believe it would succeed. Catherine
Barnard, a Cambridge law professor who is a member of The UK in a Changing
Europe academic network, says the Rottmann case is not a precedent, because
it concerned an individual whose loss of German citizenship left him
stateless, which Brexit will not do. Moreover, to rule that Brexit was
disproportionate would undermine the whole purpose of Article 50 of the
treaty, which allows countries to choose to leave the EU.

  Ms Barnard fears that loose talk of retaining EU citizenship will
merely mean more disappointment for those opposed to Brexit. It might also
irritate the government of Theresa May. Any notion of dual British/EU
citizenship post-Brexit would raise questions over divided loyalty. Mrs May
made her feelings clear last October, when she told her party conference:
"If you believe you are a citizen of the world, you are a citizen of
nowhere." She is unlikely to welcome any plan for Britons to keep EU
citizenship after Brexit.

