Full Text: 
  Corporate-bond markets are astonishingly archaic. Time to bring
them into the 21st century

  STOCKMARKETS are the public face of finance; indices like the
S&P 500 are widely reported proxies for economic health. But they are
dwarfed by the corporate-bond markets. In 2016 American equity issuance
amounted to just under $200bn; for corporate bonds the total was $1.5trn.

  The market for corporate debt is not just vast, at $50trn
globally, it has also been growing fast as a result of ultra-cheap borrowing.
Issuance in America has risen by half over the past five years. Yet despite
its importance as a source of financing for companies, the corporate-bond
market is shockingly archaic. Even basic price data are hard to come by.
Whereas stocks can be traded at the click of a button, buying and selling
corporate bonds often requires a phone call to a trading desk at an
investment bank. This method of trading still accounts for over 80% of volume
in America. Processes are correspondingly slow: 8% of trades in Europe fail
to settle in the allotted two days.

  Such inefficiencies partly reflect the particularities of bond
markets. An individual firm may have one or two types of shares, but issue
dozens of bonds that differ by maturity, date and seniority in its capital
structure. Any given bond is thus traded only rarely. In the past, banks made
markets by holding an inventory of bonds on their balance-sheet until a buyer
came along. Those electronic platforms that do exist have largely stuck to
this dealer-based model: under "request for quote" systems that
account for almost 95% of electronic trading, dealers are still the only ones
with the power to provide a quote and to buy or sell (see
"Corporate-bond markets: Click to trade").

  But this system is creaking. Tougher capital regulations
implemented after the financial crisis sought to discourage banks from
holding bonds. Trading desks now hold just 1% of all bonds, down from 2.4% as
recently as 2007. Average trade sizes have also fallen. Demand from central
banks, in places where corporate-bond purchases were part of
quantitative-easing (QE) programmes, may have obscured the extent to which
marketmakers have pulled back. As QE unwinds, shortfalls in liquidity may
become apparent.

  Restoring the banks to their market-making role by relaxing
capital rules is no answer. If trouble strikes, it is better for banks to be
out of harm's way. Instead, corporate-bond markets need to learn from
equities and help buyers and sellers to meet and trade. Regulators can do
their bit by requiring prices to be reported for completed transactions, as
incoming European rules will from early 2018, and as America has in a more
limited fashion since 2002. But the market is also showing the way. A new
technology known as "all-to-all" trading allows one institutional
investor in a network to trade bonds with any other. There are also systems
to help dealers keep track of inquiries across time, turning them from
risk-takers into matchmakers.

  Entering the electronic age

  These innovations will not suit everyone. The automation of equity
markets has cut the earnings of brokers; an end to those chummy phone calls
will do the same in the bond markets. But investors can only gain from an
environment where it is easier and cheaper to buy and sell bonds. Issuers
will also benefit from markets that can smooth out turbulence rather than
turn it into a full-scale panic and, in normal times, from a lower cost of
capital. The corporate-bond market will never be as simple or liquid as the
stockmarket. But it can still learn lessons from its higher-profile cousin.

