Full Text: 
  Chen keeps spending

  China's HNA Group is on a global shopping spree

  NOW it is a conglomerate with more than $100bn-worth of assets
around the world. But HNA Group started life as a small local airline. Chen
Feng, the Chinese company's founder, led a coalition including private
investors and the government of Hainan, a southern province, to launch Hainan
Airlines in 1993.

  Despite some help from the local government, the upstart firm was
an outsider then. The central government chose three big state-run airlines
to receive favoured landing slots, lavish subsidies and other advantages. The
scrappy Mr Chen was undeterred. With $25m in early funding from George Soros,
an American billionaire, he carved out a profitable niche.

  Since then, HNA has grown quickly, mainly through acquisitions. It
reported revenues of 600bn yuan ($90bn) last year. In 2016 it acquired a 25%
stake in America's Hilton Worldwide for $6.5bn and paid $10bn for the
aircraft-leasing division of CIT Group, a New York-based financial firm. This
week it bid nearly $1bn for Singapore's CWT, a logistics company.

  Most deals have been in industries adjacent to its core business,
such as travel, tourism and logistics. But some recent purchases have raised
eyebrows for being more distant. It spent $6bn last year on Ingram Micro, an
information-technology outfit based in California. Money has also gone into
Deutsche Bank. It is rumoured to be bidding for Forbes, an American magazine.
Some people suspect that these deals chime with China's industrial
policy more than HNA's own corporate logic.

  Yet HNA is not a classic state-owned enterprise. The Hainan
government retains a big stake in it, but HNA has traits that distinguish it
from state-owned enterprises, which tend to be sclerotic and run by
bureaucratic grey men.

  It has adopted professional management practices. Mr Chen has
trained his employees in Six Sigma, a management method popularised by Jack
Welch, a former boss of General Electric, to eliminate waste; and in a
financial methodology that scrutinises investments for economic value added.
Hainan Airlines is considered the best Chinese airline. Mr Chen, a Buddhist
scholar, has also imprinted traditional Chinese philosophies onto the
company's culture. When it takes over a firm he leads new executives in
a recitation of HNA's core values, which include "love and
devotion". HNA typically does not fire the top brass at firms it
acquires, nor does it force big lay-offs.

  Mr Chen certainly seems skilful at managing the Chinese
authorities. HNA is presenting this week's bid for CWT as part of
President Xi Jinping's "One Belt, One Road" geopolitical
strategy, for example. It is clever

to play the political card given that the state is tightening
control of outbound investment, which could hamper the company's style,
notes a Chinese business expert. A clampdown on foreign deals by Chinese
regulators, who are worried about capital outflows, has led to the
cancellation of dozens of announced acquisitions by Chinese firms.

  But HNA is having no trouble getting the money and approval to do
lots of big deals--it has spent over $40bn on acquisitions in the past three
years. Indeed, Mr Chen appears to have the advantages of a state firm,
including cheap access to capital, without the disadvantages, such as
officials telling him how to run his company, says a seasoned China hand. In
this, he reckons, HNA is becoming "a lot like Huawei", a
telecoms-equipment firm. Mr Chen should be flattered by the comparison to one
of the country's most successful multinationals. But he should also
recall that a backlash against Huawei's perceived closeness to
China's leadership led to its blacklisting by America's government.

