Full Text: 
  A biometric identification system is helping to recast the
relationship between the Indian state and its citizens

  IT TAKES a little over 90 seconds. At the government-subsidised
ration shop in Sargasan, a village in Gujarat, Chandana Prajapati places her
thumb on a fingerprint scanner. A list of the staples she and her family are
entitled to this month appears on the shopkeeper's computer: 10kg of
rice, 25kg of wheat, some cooking oil, salt and sugar. The 55-year-old
housewife has no cash nor credit card, but no matter. By tapping in an
identifying number and presenting her thumb one more time, Mrs Prajapati
authorises a payment of 271 rupees ($4.20) straight from her bank account. It
is technical wizardry worthy of Stockholm or New York; yet outside buffaloes
graze, a pot of water is coming to the boil on a pile of firewood and
children scamper between mud-brick houses.

  Like most Indians, Mrs Prajapati would have struggled to identify
herself to the authorities a few years ago, let alone to a faraway bank. But
99% of adults are now enrolled in Aadhaar, a scheme which has amassed the
fingerprints and iris scans of over 1.1bn people since 2010. With her
authorisation, any government body or private business can check whether her
fingerprints or irises match those recorded against her unique 12-digit
identifying number in its database. When it comes to identification, India
has unexpectedly leapfrogged every country with the possible exception of
Estonia, a tiddler with a penchant for innovation.

  Being visible to the state is assumed in rich countries, if only
because the taxman insists on it. But India had no equivalent of a Social
Security number, and less than half of all births are registered. Only a
small minority are required to pay income taxes. Plenty of those entitled to
government services, meanwhile, have not received them, because they have not
been identified as eligible or because middlemen have stolen their share. At
the same time, the benefits rolls are filled with fake beneficiaries, created
by those seeking to palm undeserved rations of fertiliser, food or some other
subsidised good.

  Ghosts v the machine

  Linking ration cards to an Aadhaar number, and thus to the
biometric data tied to it, means a single person cannot have more than one
and ghosts can have none. The original pitch to politicians--the scheme was
adopted by the previous government, but has been embraced by Narendra Modi,
the prime minister--was that Aadhaar would help make welfare more efficient.
The potential gains are huge. One official estimate suggests that
"leakage" in subsidy payments meant that only 27% of the money
ended up in the right hands: not so much a leaky bucket as a sieve.

  Over 400,000 ghost children were struck off school rolls in just
three states after schools were required to match their pupils to Aadhaar
numbers to keep receiving state funds. By weeding out false claims,
authorities say they have saved $8bn in two-and-a-half years; the annual
central-government budget for subsidies is about $40bn. That may be an
exaggeration, and critics say there are other ways to improve the
administration of subsidies. But the savings clearly outstrip the roughly
$1bn cost of deploying Aadhaar.

  Changing the mechanics of how a benefit is received is often just
as important as the benefit itself. Development experts like the fact that,
at least in theory, a villager can gain access to a subsidy in a distant
city. This removes a big barrier to internal migration. A project to purge
electoral lists found 800,000 fictitious voters in Punjab, a state of 30m.
The authorities suspect that 30% of driving licences are fake, many of them
duplicates to help drivers evade bans--a ruse that would be impossible if all
licences were linked to Aadhaar.

  Indeed, the improvements in accuracy and efficiency are so
enormous that the government now wants to use Aadhaar more broadly than
originally advertised. Recent edicts propose to make it compulsory for
everything from booking train tickets to owning a mobile phone. If
implemented, these new uses would put paid to the notion that enrolling in
Aadhaar is voluntary, which was the promise of its backers--led by Nandan
Nilekani, an IT grandee who used to chair the agency that set up Aadhaar.
This in a country with no overt privacy laws, let alone a tradition of
handling sensitive data competently (many ministries' websites contain
spreadsheets teeming with Indians' personal data).

  But Aadhaar is a poor way to build up an Orwellian panopticon, Mr
Nilekani argues, given the wealth of information already available from
telephone records, GPS data, bank statements and the like. A bigger problem
may be the impracticalities of the system. Unlike reading an ID card,
checking someone's identity through Aadhaar requires an internet
connection and, often, electricity. Ration-shop owners in out-of-the-way
places are known to march their customers to the top of a hill, roof or
tree--wherever a phone signal can be found--to check their identity. Even
then, samples seem to show that roughly a third of authentications come back
negative, an extraordinarily high failure rate for a technology that people
rely on for necessities. The chafed fingers of manual labourers often cause
problems, for example.

  Those high failure rates are just teething troubles linked to
Aadhaar's many new uses, says Ajay Bhushan Pandey, the head of the
agency overseeing the scheme. Devices that scan irises (which offer more
reliable readings) are becoming cheaper and should become the norm, he says.
Already the Aadhaar database is being tapped 20m times a day, 20 times the
rate of a year and a half ago. That thrills cheerleaders as much as it alarms
critics.

