Full Text: 
  Juries acquit if sentences are harsh

  THOUGH no one has been executed in Britain for over 50 years,
until 1998 someone convicted of high treason or "piracy with
violence" could in theory be put to death. The law is now clearly
against capital punishment, but Britons are not. Fully one-third would like
the death penalty to be brought back; the leader of the populist UK
Independence Party has suggested a referendum on the matter. Yet research
presented at this week's Royal Economic Society conference suggests that
if you really want to be tough on criminals, killing off capital punishment
makes sense.

  Anna Bindler and Randi Hjalmarsson, both of the University of
Gothenburg, examined over 200,000 cases from the Old Bailey criminal court in
London from 1715 to 1900. During this period capital punishment was abolished
for many offences, from counterfeiting money (in 1832) to robbery (in 1837).
Making the necessary statistical controls, the authors looked at the change
in the likelihood of conviction for offences that were no longer capital.

  The paper suggests that when capital punishment was an option,
juries were often reluctant to convict at all. They may have felt it was a
little rum to send someone to the gallows for stealing a cow, so they
downgraded the charge or acquitted the defendant. The authors find that
juries were particularly reluctant to convict women.

  Once death was off the table, however, jurors could convict with a
clearer conscience. The paper finds that the abolition of capital punishment
increased the chance of conviction for all crimes by around eight percentage
points, with especially large effects for violent offences. The temporary
halt of penal transportation during the American war of independence had a
somewhat smaller effect on the likelihood to convict, suggesting that juries
considered living in America to be a prospect slightly less awful than death.

  Past research has found that would-be criminals are more put off
by an increased likelihood of conviction than they are by more severe
sentences. If so, then getting rid of the most brutal punishments could make
criminal-justice systems work better. If the third of Britons who would like
the death penalty reintroduced got their way, the country might inadvertently
end up letting more criminals walk free.

