Full Text: 
  Not going round fast enough

  The capital's public-transport system is sputtering

  TRANSANTIAGO, the Chilean capital's public-transport system,
had its tenth birthday in February, but no one celebrated. Launched with much
fanfare, the scheme was supposed to integrate bus and metro lines and speed
up traffic. Smog-spewing yellow buses disappeared. Smart cards replaced cash.

  But Transantiago is sputtering. Fare evasion is rampant, journeys
are getting slower and the state has spent billions of dollars to prop up
private bus operators. Passengers sometimes wait ages at stops scrawled with
graffiti with no inkling of when the next bus will arrive. Espacio Publico, a
think-tank, calls Transantiago Chile's worst public-policy project since
the country returned to democracy in 1990.

  Despite all that, Transantiago has brought some improvements. The
number of fatal accidents has dropped sharply, as has pollution from exhaust
fumes. The system's 20,000 employees are now on formal contracts and
have better working conditions than before. Because bus drivers no longer
handle cash, the number of robberies has fallen. Compared with transport in
many other Latin American cities, Santiago's works pretty well.

  But it would be hard to persuade most commuters of that. The
problems start with design. Planners laid some bus lanes directly over metro
lines, so the two forms of transport compete rather than complementing each
other. The city has hired too few inspectors to catch fare-dodgers and
motorists who stray into bus lanes (though cameras are catching some of the
errant cars). Sometimes buses are so crowded that even honest passengers have
trouble reaching the card-swiper.

  Increasingly, passengers are less inclined to pay. Despite the
subsidies, fares have risen by 40% since 2010, far faster than most prices.
Bus journeys have slowed by 8% since 2012. For some, fare-dodging is a form
of protest. Guillermo Munoz, the metropolitan area's director of public
transport, admits that in some parts of the capital the service is "very
bad". Last month Chile's transport minister resigned, in part to
take responsibility for Transantiago's failings.

  Espacio Publico says one reason for the high subsidies is that too
few companies operate the buses. The system began with 16 operators but
dropouts and mergers have shrunk the number to seven. The largest firms
operate 1,200 buses apiece. This makes them "too big to fail", says
Clemente Perez of Espacio Publico. Hence the subsidies to keep money-losing
companies afloat. No company should have more than 10% of the market, Mr
Perez thinks.

  The city will have a chance to correct that next year, when
contracts to operate bus lines are to expire. It is likely to encourage
smaller and newer companies to enter the market. That might release money for
improvements. The new transport minister, Paola Tapia, has created a
task-force to help reduce fare-dodging and promised more money for
inspectors. With luck, Transantiago could become a service that commuters are
happy to pay for.

