Full Text: 
  Going, going, gone?

  An auction house downsizes

  THERE was only one place to bid for Ian Fleming's typewriter,
Pele's 1970 World Cup jersey or a meteorite that hit the Earth in 1803:
Christie's South Kensington. Opened in 1975, the auction rooms sold the
quirkier, less expensive (and often more exciting) stuff that the main branch
of the venerable auctioneer, in posh St James's, eschewed. The young
upstart could nonetheless do a roaring trade, getting [pounds sterling]55,700
($70,000) for the keyboard that gave life to James Bond, [pounds
sterling]157,750 for the Brazilian's sweaty shirt and [pounds
sterling]25,300 for the lump of rock (with its fusion crust almost completely
intact). They all beat their reserve prices by a mile.

  But that is all coming to an end. Christie's South Kensington
is set to close. It is the most significant casualty in a restructuring of
Christie's operations; there will also be fewer sales in its Amsterdam
rooms. Altogether, about 250 people will lose their jobs, mainly in Britain
and continental Europe, representing about 12% of Christie's worldwide
workforce. It represents a big upheaval in the art world. But it is
necessary, argues Christie's French owner, Groupe Artemis, a
conglomerate owned by Francois Pinault, to adapt to a changing market.

  The most important trend shaping that market is the continuing
shift in Christie's clientele away from Europe. Last year 39% of the
firm's new customers were from the Americas and 19% from Asia, says its
chief executive, Guillaume Cerutti. Thus, as Christie's consolidates its
operations onto one site in London, where James Christie founded the business
in 1766, it is expanding further in China, where it is in the privileged
position of being the only Western auction house with a licence to conduct
sales on the mainland. Last October Christie's opened its third office
in China, in Beijing. It is also about to open a new showroom in Los Angeles.

  With the high costs of labour and property in London, it has also
become hard to make much money on the cheaper items sold at Christie's
South Kensington branch. The [pounds sterling]1m-5m range is the most
profitable spot in the art market now. Sotheby's, the great rival of
Christie's, sold its own lower-value London salesroom in Olympia in
2007. Christie's hopes that much of the sort of stuff sold in South
Kensington, such as wine, watches and photographs, can be auctioned online.
Last year its online sales doubled, to [pounds sterling]50m.

  But some fear that the closure will impoverish Christie's in
the long run, and possibly open up opportunities for Sotheby's. A former
head of Christie's South Kensington, Anthony Coleridge, has written an
open letter to Mr Pinault accusing him of destroying staff morale and
damaging the Christie's brand. And a lot of expertise could be lost.
"South Kensington was where you tried things out, and brought it to St
James's if it matured," says one Christie's insider. The
smaller auction room developed curatorial knowledge, pioneered sales and thus
created markets--for toys, posters, fossils and more. "You have to
create sales that are interesting to collectors, and they love the diversity
of South Kensington."

  Another eclectic collection, featuring meteorites, fossilised palm
fronds, a demonstration apparatus for the coefficient of friction ("19th
century, possibly German"), table globes and two three-rotor Enigma
cipher machines are due to go under the hammer in South Kensington on April
27th. Catch it while you can.

