Full Text: 
  Germany is running out of people, starting in the east

  WERE it not for the graffiti on abandoned buildings,
Bitterfeld-Wolfen, two towns north of Leipzig joined as one in 2007, would
seem devoid of young people. Pharmacies, physiotherapy surgeries and shops
selling garden gnomes line the sleepy streets. In its heyday the place had a
booming chemical industry. Today "the air is much cleaner and we can
finally hang out laundry," says an elderly local out on a morning
stroll. "But many jobs were lost and so few children are left." He
points out a building that was once a school; today it is one of many care
homes.

  Despite an influx of 1.2m refugees over the past two years,
Germany's population faces near-irreversible decline. According to
predictions from the UN in 2015, two in five Germans will be over 60 by 2050
and Europe's oldest country will have shrunk to 75m from 82m. Since the
1970s, more Germans have been dying than are born. Fewer births and longer
lives are a problem for most rich countries. But the consequences are more
acute for Germany, where birth rates are lower than in Britain and France.

  If Germany is a warning for others, its eastern part is a warning
for its west. If it were still a country, East Germany would be the oldest in
the world. Nearly 30 years after unification the region still suffers the
aftershock from the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, when millions--mostly
young, mostly women--fled for the west. Those who remained had record-low
birth rates. "Kids not born in the '90s, also didn't have kids
in the 2010s. It's the echo of the echo," says Frank Swiaczny from
the Federal Institute for Population Research, a think-tank in Wiesbaden. The
east's population will shrink from 12.5m in 2016 to 8.7m by 2060,
according to government statistics. Saxony-Anhalt, the state to which
Bitterfeld-Wolfen belongs, is ahead of the curve.

  Berlin used to pay little attention to the area. But regional
decline has already had a political effect. In a state election in March
2016, a populist party, the AfD, came first in Bitterfeld and second in
Wolfen. Such places will matter in a federal election in September, which is
expected to be tight. Bitterfeld-Wolfen has seen its population plummet from
75,000 in 1989 to 40,500 today. Even after administrators tore down blocks of
flats, and cut floors off others, skeletal remains of buildings still await
the wrecking ball. Nearly one building in five is empty. A grand
Stalinist-era construction, once the town's cultural palace, now stands
deserted. Two-thirds of kindergartens and over half the schools have closed
since 1990. The number of pupils finishing secondary school has fallen by
half. Employers struggle to fill vacancies.

  Apprentices--especially in service industries--are hard to find.
The one booming industry, care, is desperate for more geriatricians, nurses
and trainees. To help fill the gap, the local Euro-Schulen, a training
institute, has turned to Vietnam. Having studied German in Hanoi, 16 young
apprentices started this month, with 20 more expected soon. Nearby Dessau is
setting up a similar arrangement with China.

  Germany has long relied on migrants to make up for low fertility
rates. Unusually high migration in recent years has more than offset the
shrinkage of the native-born population. But the EU countries that have
traditionally provided the migrants, such as Poland, are also ageing. Migrant
flows will slow; competition for labour will increase. And Olga Potzsch, from
the Federal Statistical Office, argues that Germany will need far more
migrants to stop population decline, which is predicted to accelerate from
2020.

  Uwe Schulze, a senior local official, says that refugees are not
filling the labour shortage. Of the 2,600-odd asylum-seekers who arrived in
the area in 2015 and 2016, fewer than a third are now registered as
"capable of working" and only 40 are fully employed. From his
wood-panelled office in a neoclassical building that once housed one of
Europe's largest colour-film makers, Armin Schenk,
Bitterfeld-Wolfen's mayor, says the problems are mostly to do with
language, qualifications and uncertainty about asylum. Asked whether Afghans
and Syrians could join the same programme as the Vietnamese, Liane Michaelis,
from Euro-Schulen, forcefully shakes her head, citing educational, religious
and ethical barriers for care jobs. She adds that "those who do have the
right papers leave quickly". According to the OECD, about half of
asylum-seekers who started off in eastern Germany in the past moved to places
such as Hamburg once they secured their permit.

  With the odds seemingly stacked against it, Bitterfeld-Wolfen is
at least trying. On a whirlwind tour of the town, Mr Schenk shows how the old
coal mine was turned into a lake with a new marina and a promenade. He
repeats the town's mantra: "It's all about offering
good-quality life and leisure." A brochure shows pictures of smiling
children, yachts and tennis. Bitterfeld-Wolfen, it reads, is "one of the
youngest cities in Germany". But even if such marketing did stem
departures (and in 2015, for the first time, inward migration slightly
exceeded the outflow) the town is still shrinking; more than twice as many
die each year as are born.

  Across many parts of rural Europe mayors struggle with similar
problems, wondering when to turn their school into a care home. By 2050
Greece, Italy, Poland, Portugal and Spain--which, unlike Germany, have all
suffered net brain-drains--will be older than Germany by median age and will
have shrunk substantially, according to the UN. Ageing and emigration are
likely further to dampen growth in central and southern European countries,
says the IMF. It calculates that by 2030 GDP per person in several countries
may be 3-4% lower than it would have been without emigration.

  Where Bitterfeld-Wolfen goes&#8230;

  In Germany, however, the consequences are particularly acute. With
a strong economy and a tight labour market, some employers already struggle
to fill vacancies. BCG, a consultancy, predicts that by 2030 the country will
be short of between 5m and 7m workers. The triple shock of a smaller
workforce, increased social spending and the likely dampening effect of an
older workforce on innovation and productivity will drag down future growth,
predicts Oliver Holtemoller of the Leipzig Institute for Economic Research.
These effects are stronger in the east, he adds. Productivity is 20% lower
than in the west; the ageing population and continuing migration to the west
will make economic convergence even less likely.

