Full Text: 
  Investors don't always like democracy

  THE VICTORY of Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey's president, in a
referendum on April 16th is seen by many observers as a worrying step on the
road to autocracy. The vote handed Mr Erdogan far-reaching new powers. But
the Turkish lira, government bonds and stockmarket all gained ground as the
results came in.

  It was a reminder that the relationship between markets and
democracy is not rock-solid. Like an errant husband, investors may proclaim
their fidelity to democracy but are not averse to seeing someone else on the
side.

  In Turkey investors may have feared turmoil if Mr Erdogan's
proposal had been defeated. It is an old, but fairly reliable, rule that
investors dislike uncertainty. And the early years of Mr Erdogan's
tenure, when he was seen as a liberalising democrat, saw rapid economic
growth; his transformation into an emerging autocrat has not put investors
off. Since he took office, the Istanbul market has gained 760% (see chart).

  An authoritarian government can provide certainty, at least in the
short term. In 1922, when Mussolini took power in Italy, its equity market
returned 29% and its government bonds 18%, according to Mike Staunton of the
London Business School. Hitler's accession in 1933 saw German shares
return 14% and bonds 15%. True, Wall Street did even better that year under
Franklin Roosevelt but still--even then, Hitler was clearly a dangerous
extremist.

  The world's most developed economies tend to be democracies,
and to be more open to trade and foreign investment. But as China has
demonstrated, it is certainly possible to generate rapid economic growth
without a democratic system. China's stockmarket (along with Hong
Kong's) has been among the best-performing bourses this millennium.

  Go back in time 100 years and investors would have been pretty
suspicious of democratic governments. The pre-1914 world was dominated by
governments with restricted voter franchises, in which currencies were tied
to the gold standard, in part to protect the creditor classes from the
ravages of inflation. The arrival of mass democracy after 1918 was followed
by a boom in the 1920s but then by the Depression, stockmarket collapse and
abandonment of the gold standard.

  Democracies can enact policies that are not market-friendly; the
interests of ordinary voters and international investors are not always
aligned. If voters support trade tariffs, nationalisation or higher taxes on
firms and top earners, then both stockmarkets and currencies are likely to
suffer.

  The great bull market of the 1980s and 1990s, on the other hand,
coincided with political moves to reduce regulations, lower taxes and let
capital flow freely across borders. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, many
former Communist countries privatised state-owned companies and opened
domestic stockmarkets. In many countries, investors could be relatively
relaxed about which party took office; economic reforms were pushed through
by Bill Clinton, Gerhard Schroder and Tony Blair, all politicians from the
centre-left.

  But the background has changed again. There are remarkable
similarities between the election in America and the referendums in Britain
and Turkey. In all three, the electorate was bitterly divided and the margin
of victory was narrow (Donald Trump lost the popular vote but won the
electoral college). In all three, the victorious side drew its support from
rural areas and small towns, and was opposed by voters in the big cities. And
in all three cases, it has ignored the narrowness of the majority and has
argued it has a mandate for radical policy change.

  Democracies work best when there is a modicum of consensus and
voters are willing to accept defeat for their own side as legitimate. But
that is harder when the ideological divisions are sharp and electoral systems
produce "winner takes all" results. In France, for example, voters
may yet be faced with a choice in the second round between a candidate from
the extreme right and one from the extreme left.

  This is likely to result in more radical political changes, of the
type that markets do find unsettling. The general drift is towards more
authoritarian, more nationalistic policies that appeal to voters whose living
standards have stagnated. That process can create a chain reaction;
nationalist policies in one country can provoke an adverse reaction in its
neighbours and trading partners. Investors may believe that some of these
authoritarian leaders will deliver policies they like in the short run--tax
cuts, for example. But in the long run, this is a development that ought to
concern them greatly.

  Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

