Full Text: 
  Seemed like a trustworthy chap

  Blogger, provocateur, "expert", scammer

  CHARGES of Russian interference in European politics tend to be
shrouded in mystery. Take the case of Egor Putilov (pictured), also known as
Alexander Fridback, Tobias Lagerfeldt and Aleksandr Yarovenko. On June 8th
2016, Sveriges Radio, the Swedish public radio station, interviewed Mr
Putilov, who identified himself as a former employee of the national
migration agency. He stated that asylum-seekers as old as 40 were claiming to
be children, and that the agency was letting them in. In a country divided
over refugee policy, the allegation seemed explosive.

  Two hours later, Sveriges Radio deleted the interview. Mr Putilov
was an unreliable source: he had taken a journalism course at the broadcaster
some months earlier, and had been reported to the police for failing to
return his temporary press card. Then in August, Aftonbladet, a daily,
reported that someone calling himself Egor Putilov had used the pen name
Tobias Lagerfeldt to write an opinion piece that it had published, calling
for a more open refugee policy. Moreover, it found, the so-called Mr Putilov
was in fact Alexander Fridback, an employee of the ultra-nationalist Sweden
Democrats party.

  This is where things get really confusing. Mr Fridback immigrated
to Sweden from Russia in 2007, apparently under the name Aleksandr Yarovenko.
In 2011 he changed his family name to Fridback, supposedly because Swedes
found Yarovenko hard to pronounce. He opened a travel business, mainly for
Russian clients, and began blogging in Russian (under the name Egor Putilov)
about trips to far-flung lands such as Mali and Syria. He was reportedly
arrested in Syria in early 2012. On his return, he began writing freelance
articles for the Swedish press and took a job for nine months as a clerk at
the immigration agency, the basis of his later claim to know how it treats
refugees (though he said he had worked there for three years).

  In 2015 Mr Fridback wrote an opinion piece in Aftonbladet alleging
that Islamic State could use the migrant crisis to infiltrate Sweden. Within
hours, his article was picked up by Sputnik, the Russian state-controlled
news agency. Later that year he offered his services (as Egor Putilov) to
Sweden's internal-security agency, which was starting a department to
combat influence operations by IS and Russia. Most damningly, Sveriges Radio
discovered that in 2014 Mr Fridback had bought a house in Sweden at a
below-market price from a Russian criminal who was, at the time, in prison in
Russia. Two months later he sold the house at a profit of about $700,000.

  No one was sure what it all meant, and Mr Fridback denies any
shady connections or wrongdoing. But because of his exposure to Russia,
security experts termed Mr Fridback a security risk, the government demanded
explanations, and he ultimately left his job with the Sweden Democrats. It
remains unclear whether he was an independent flim-flam artist or an agent
acting on behalf of Russia--or a bit of both.

