Full Text: 
  Donald Trump's missile strike on Syria was justified. But his
strategy is confused and confusing

  THERE are good reasons to cheer the missile attack ordered by
Donald Trump on a Syrian air base on April 6th. It sent a message to Bashar
al-Assad, Syria's despot, that America would not tolerate his use of
chemical weapons. It also showed that Mr Trump, despite many indications to
the contrary, was prepared to act to uphold an international norm and to do
so for humanitarian reasons: he was outraged by a nerve-gas attack that
killed more than 80 people in the rebel enclave of Idlib. But one barrage
doesn't make a strategy.

  Before Mr Trump saw television pictures of poisoned children, he
had said that getting rid of Mr Assad was no longer a goal of American
policy, as it had been, at least notionally, under Barack Obama. In the week
before the chemical attack, both the secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, and
America's UN ambassador, Nikki Haley, had confirmed that shift, thus
possibly increasing Mr Assad's sense of impunity. The priority for Mr
Trump was the defeat of Islamic State (IS). Wider questions about
Syria's future would come later.

  Inevitably, those questions are now back to the fore. When
military force is used, it is reasonable to ask: what next? Various members
of the administration have tried to explain the thinking behind the missile
strike (see page 37). Mr Tillerson, on his way to a G7 foreign
ministers' meeting in Italy, castigated the Russians for
"incompetence" in failing to restrain their repulsive ally, but
said that nothing else had changed. Ms Haley contradicted him, arguing that
there could be no peace with Mr Assad still in power. H.R. McMaster, Mr
Trump's national security adviser, tried splitting the difference. Mr
Trump himself was uncharacteristically reticent. Confusion reigns.

  What might Mr Trump now do about the Syrian regime's
continued use of other indiscriminate weapons against civilians, such as
barrel bombs packed with scrap metal? Maybe nothing. But in Italy Mr
Tillerson suddenly suggested a new policy of unlimited interventionism,
saying: "We rededicate ourselves to holding to account any and all who
commit crimes against the innocents anywhere in the world." A few hours
later Sean Spicer, the president's press secretary, said: "If you
gas a baby, if you put a barrel bomb into innocent people, I think you will
see a response from this president." Does that mean that Mr Trump now
favours overthrowing Mr Assad? Surely not, for that would mean direct
confrontation in the air with Russia and on the ground with Mr Assad's
other ally, Iran.

  Instead of confusing rhetoric, the administration should be
preparing for the day, fast approaching, when IS in Syria has been thrown out
of its "capital" in Raqqa by American-backed Kurdish and Arab
forces. When the jihadists no longer hold significant territory, America
should be prepared to lead international forces protecting mainly Sunni Arab
and Kurdish areas in the east and north of the country from the Assad
regime's attempts to widen its area of control. The temporary de facto
partition of Syria offers the best hope of a political settlement that
ultimately leads to Mr Assad's departure. Yet if Mr Trump is thinking
about such a plan, there is no sign of it.

  Of Putin and predictability

  After the missile strike, any lingering notion that Mr Trump might
strike a grand bargain with Russia over Syria is dead. The end of his
bromance with Vladimir Putin is welcome--America's interests and
Russia's are so at odds that it was always doomed to fail. However, it
would be nice to think that Mr Trump was pursuing a coherent strategy abroad,
rather than reacting to what he had just seen on Fox News. Unpredictability
has its uses in foreign policy, but it is worrying that even Mr Trump's
closest aides have no idea what he will do next.

