Full Text: 
  Another chapter in the never-ending debate about gender and power

  LANGUAGES often force awkward choices. In English, you can say
"someone left his umbrella" and risk annoying some women, or
"someone left their umbrella" and risk alienating some grammar
sticklers. In French, son parapluie can mean either "his" or
"her" umbrella.

  But this hardly means there are no problems with gender, sex and
politics in France. The French language requires a gender for every single
noun and adjective: not only men and women, bulls and cows, but also tables
and chairs, rocks and bricks. (The French for "gender" is genre,
which also means "class" or "type", as it does in
English.) A noun's gender rarely has anything to do with its real-world
qualities: there's not much feminine about la table, or anything macho
about le chapeau (hat).

  But it happens that titles of powerful people, unlike the genders
of hats and tables, are not random: it's le ministre, le general, le
chef d'etat (head of state), le senateur, le magistrat. A pattern
emerges: whereas a few "generic" words are feminine (like la
personne), all these powerful titles are masculine. A generic president is le
president, masculine, perhaps subtly nudging French-speakers to think of
presidents as men. Only if a woman becomes the actual president--as Marine Le
Pen, of the National Front hopes to do in the French elections which begin on
April 23rd--does the title become la presidente.

  The traditional use of the masculine as generic has rubbed various
French people the wrong way. In 1984, the government called upon the French
Academy to look into the question of feminising certain titles. The academy,
the official guardian of the language since 1635, replied with, in effect, a
refusal. Titles that were originally grammatically masculine should not be
given feminine versions; "unintended consequences" could result.
Grammatical gender only occasionally corresponds with biological sex, the
academicians argued. They seemed to think they had the impeccably feminist
position. A woman is just as capable as a man of being le president. (La
presidente, say some traditionalists going further, is the wife of the
president. This was certainly the case a century ago, but today's first
lady in France is known as the premiere dame.)

  Various bodies pressed on, ignoring the academy, which has no
powers of enforcement. In 1998 the National Assembly ruled that titles
relevant to its various officers and functions should be feminised, such as
la deputee and la presidente. In 2014, a deputy from the centre-right, Julien
Aubert, sided with the academy against the chamber's rules, and
repeatedly referred to the presiding officer, Sandrine Mazetier from the
opposing Socialist Party, as madame le president, mixing the feminine
personal title and the masculine job title. Ms Mazetier, as she had the right
to do under the chamber's rules, fined him a quarter of his monthly
salary, and a debate ensued under headlines like "When ridicule kills
feminism" and "Should the French Academy be dissolved?"

  The problem cannot be entirely avoided. The academy rightly notes
that in the plural, the masculine has always covered the feminine too, and
writing for example tous ceux (all those who), using masculine forms, has
rarely attracted much attention; the masculine is "unmarked",
meaning it carries no special meaning, whereas the feminine is
"marked", or specifically female. Writing toutes celles et tous
ceux over and over would fill French with even more lumbering awkwardness
than repeated "he or she" does in English, given the number of
words it would affect in French. Words like "voters" and
"members" could become the shorter, but typographically ugly and
unpronounceable electeurs/trices or adherent(e)s.

  For now, mainstream French opinion is converging on a compromise
between practical solutions on one hand and the French Academy's
traditionalism on the other. The masculine is generic, especially for
plurals: no need for electeurs/trices. But titles may be feminised when doing
so is grammatically simple and logical, as it usually is. And those who want
to be known by them deserve that courtesy.

  Ms Le Pen would hardly be a perfect tribune for feminism as
France's head of state. She has posed as a defender of women's
rights, but largely in opposition to the presumed antifeminist attitudes of
the Muslims she would like to keep out of France. Many French voters,
according to polls, would like to see her keep her current job
title--presidente indeed, but only of her own party.

