Full Text: 
  The president's bid for a second term alarms democrats

  IN THE early hours of June 28th 2009 a unit of the Honduran army
stormed the house of the president, Manuel Zelaya, disarmed his guard and
spirited him onto a plane bound for Costa Rica. The army sent tanks onto the
streets, silenced radio and television stations and cut off electricity and
water to parts of Tegucigalpa, the capital. A fake letter of resignation from
Mr Zelaya was read out to Honduras's congress, which approved his
ousting. It was Latin America's last real coup.

  As a general election approaches in November, those events are
uppermost in Hondurans' minds. That is partly because Mr Zelaya has not
gone away; his wife, Xiomara Castro, is a presidential candidate. More
important, the current president, Juan Orlando Hernandez, is breaking a taboo
which Mr Zelaya was thrown out of office to protect: he is running for
re-election. That, plus Mr Hernandez's authoritarian style, has made the
main election issue the fate of democracy itself.

  The authors of the constitution, adopted in 1982, wanted to
prevent would-be strongmen from entrenching themselves in power.
Unambiguously, the document declares that anyone who has exercised
"executive power" may not be president. An office-holder who merely
advocates changing that provision "shall immediately" be dismissed.
The white-hatted Mr Zelaya, whose soft spot for Venezuelan socialism
terrified the Honduran elite, planned to hold a non-binding referendum on
whether to convene a constituent assembly to change the constitution. Many
thought he would use it to hang on to power indefinitely. That triggered his
removal.

  Mr Hernandez, whose Machiavellian talents would impress even the
Florentine philosopher, did nothing so clumsy. He is a beneficiary of a suit
brought by a former president, Rafael Callejas, who argued that the term
limit violated his human rights. In April 2015 the supreme court ruled in the
ex-president's favour, suspending the constitutional ban on re-election.
Mr Callejas is not running, but Mr Hernandez is.

  He is a paradox. Credited with strengthening what had threatened
to become a failed state, he is also reviled for stunting its development. He
governs a country that serves as a conduit for much of the cocaine that
enters the United States, and where police and politicians are enmeshed with
drug-trafficking gangs. The son of Porfirio Lobo, Mr Hernandez's
predecessor, has pleaded guilty to cocaine trafficking. More than 60% of
Hondurans are poor. In 2013, the year before Mr Hernandez took office,
Honduras was still the most murderous country on earth. Its public finances
were a mess: the budget deficit was 7.9% of GDP (see chart). Some 600,000
Hondurans, about 7% of the population, have moved to the United States.

  Mr Hernandez, who was schooled in a military academy, brought a
thwack of authority. At his inauguration ceremony he dramatically dispatched
the army to take the field against criminals. "The party has
ended," he declared. The murder rate has fallen since the army took up
positions in the country's most violent barrios, helped by
crime-prevention programmes financed by the United States. Mr Hernandez has
disrupted some drug-trafficking networks and shipped dozens of suspected drug
lords to the United States for trial, earning the gratitude of both the Obama
and Trump administrations.

  He steadied the government's finances by raising the sales
tax and cutting the wage bill. The poor are spared, Mr Hernandez's
allies insist. Many benefit from Vida Mejor (Better Life), a programme that
provides roofs, water filters and other goodies. Teachers have been
disciplined: schoolchildren now spend 225 days a year in the classroom. With
help from McKinsey, a consultancy, the government has hatched a plan to
develop such industries as tourism, textiles and call centres.

  This record has bred more suspicion than goodwill. That is partly
because Mr Hernandez seems bent on controlling the institutions he purports
to be strengthening. "We're paying for security with the coin of
freedom," says Raul Pineda, a political analyst who supports Mr
Hernandez's National Party.

  The doubts begin with the president's signature policy of
sending the army to fight crime. Military units deter some violence, but
after a drop the murder rate has stabilised at a high level. Most people
still think insecurity is the biggest problem. The government plans to
replace soldiers with a reformed police force, but that will take years. In
the meantime, Mr Hernandez is spreading the military mindset through his
administration. He has deployed officers in all branches of government to
serve as his "eyes and ears", says Mr Pineda.

  The judiciary and the electoral commission are subservient to the
president, he says. In a ranking of judicial systems by the World Justice
Project, a pressure group, Honduras comes 92nd out of 113 countries on its
measure of constraints on government powers. During Mr Lobo's presidency
the social-security system was defrauded of $300m; a small amount of money
from firms linked to the scandal helped finance Mr Hernandez's campaign
(without his knowledge, he says). That revelation triggered weekly torchlit
protests and demands for his resignation in 2015.

  He sought to lower the temperature by inviting in an
anti-corruption mission, MACCIH, under the auspices of the Organisation of
American States. It has big ambitions: to help prosecutors investigate
corruption, spur a cleanup of party financing and encourage judicial reform.
A new investigation and prosecution unit specialising in corruption is to
begin work next month. MACCIH helped win long jail sentences for the former
head of the social-security institute. "We never had such a sentence
before for corruption," says its Peruvian chief, Juan Jimenez.

  But the group is encountering as much resistance as collaboration.
It has clashed with congress over the implementation of the party-financing
law and with the president and congress over the naming of magistrates to the
government's spending watchdog. MACCIH is being subjected to a
"black campaign", says Mr Jimenez.

  Now the trial of Mr Lobo's son in New York threatens to
damage Mr Hernandez's crime-fighting image. In March a courtroom heard a
former member of Los Cachiros, a drug-trafficking gang, testify that he had
met Mr Hernandez's brother, Tony. The purpose was to persuade the
government to pay its debt to a company used by the gang to launder money.
Tony Hernandez denies the claim.

  The president's re-election bid caps the list of grievances
against him. He favours limiting presidents to two four-year terms, which is
the practice in the United States. The opposition, which deems the entire
project to be illegitimate, refuses to write that provision into law. If Mr
Hernandez wins the election, "it would validate the break with the
constitution," says Edmundo Orellana, a former defence minister and
foreign minister.

  Although nearly two-thirds of Hondurans oppose re-election, Mr
Hernandez may well prevail. The coup fractured the country's two-party
system, in which the National Party took turns in power with the Liberals,
whose ideology and programme differed little. The toppling of Mr Zelaya, a
Liberal, split that party, with some factions backing the coup. Mr
Zelaya's supporters broke away to form Libre, which is putting up Ms
Castro.

  She shares the anti-Hernandez field with two more contenders:
Salvador Nasralla, a flamboyant sports broadcaster, who is the nominee of the
Anti-Corruption Party, and Luis Zelaya (no relation to Manuel), the
Liberals' candidate. Mr Zelaya, a soft-spoken university professor with
no political experience, is running as much against the traditional system as
against Mr Hernandez. His Liberal Party is "the same" as the
others, he confesses. He offers a programme of "social liberalism",
which includes such goals as fairer taxes, freedom of expression and
education for all. But "no economic model works if you don't have
institutionality," he says.

  His hopes of winning a one-round election may depend on unity
within the opposition, which has not developed yet. Libre and the
Anti-Corruption Party seem to be close to uniting behind Mr Nasralla. If Mr
Zelaya were to join, he might head the coalition. But he says he will not
accept a deal based on the customary sharing out of top jobs among party
loyalists. Mr Zelaya thinks he can win anyway, as disenchanted voters unite
behind him. But it would be unwise to bet against the crafty Mr Hernandez
winning one more four-year term--at least.

