Full Text: 
  Europe should think about what to do if Marine Le Pen wins

  AS USUAL, the president's first foreign trip is to the
chancellery in Berlin. But the meeting with Angela Merkel does not go well.
The two women instantly begin squabbling. Accused of breaking Europe's
rules on borders, Mrs Merkel fires back that her visitor has not done her
homework: Germany has always acted lawfully. Fine, growls la president

    e: if Mrs Merkel wants a war, she will get one. On her return to
Paris the president orders the European Union flag removed from official
buildings. Soon afterwards she calls, and wins, a referendum on France's
exit from the euro. The streets stir, stockmarkets swoon and Europe reels.

  This cheerful tale, as depicted in "La Presidente" by
Francois Durpaire and Farid Boudjellal, a graphic novel that imagines Marine
Le Pen's first months as president of France, is not one the rest of
Europe wants to hear. The continent's mood is just starting to brighten.
Economies are picking up, and the Islamophobes lost in the Dutch election.
Brexit, Europeans think, will be a disaster only for the British. True, the
looming cloud in France is hard to ignore: the first round of France's
presidential election is on April 23rd, with a run-off two weeks later, and
Ms Le Pen leads most first-round opinion polls. But few seem to have thought
seriously about the prospect of her winning, and many dismiss the idea.

  Confident Eurosaurs

  They have half a point. Ms Le Pen is unlikely to become president;
France's two-round system inoculates against extremist parties like her
National Front. Polls find her losing the run-off by wide margins against all
potential challengers. But like the meteor that wiped out Tyrannosaurus Rex,
her victory would be a low-probability, high-impact event. Ms Le Pen aims to
withdraw France from the euro, the EU's passport-free Schengen area, and
possibly the EU itself. The EU can cope with small troublemakers like Hungary
or Greece. But to lose a large founding member would throw its future into
question. Betting markets rate her chances between 20-25%; the Eurasia Group,
a consultancy, puts them at nearly 40%. These are not numbers that should let
Europe sleep easy.

  What should Europe expect from a Le Pen presidency? Markets would
quail at her desire to quit the euro, which she describes as a "knife in
the ribs" of the French economy for denying its exporters the benefits
of competitive devaluation. One investor predicts that a Le Pen victory would
see French and Italian spreads over German government bonds rise by 2% and
the euro slump below parity with the dollar. (Something similar might be
expected in the less likely event of a victory for Jean-Luc Melenchon, a
hard-left candidate making a late surge.)

  The mechanism for leaving the euro, says Ludovic de Danne, Ms Le
Pen's Europe adviser, would be a referendum on exiting the EU
altogether. But that faces constitutional barriers, as Ms Le Pen cannot win a
majority in legislative elections in June. Moreover, the polarising effect of
her election may not leave her much political wriggle-room. French voters
have little appetite for a collapse in the value of their assets, or the
chaos of capital controls a la grecque that a promised "Frexit"
would bring. With markets roiling, French banks under pressure and protesters
filling the streets, Ms Le Pen might prefer to park the issue. There are
signs of this already; her rhetoric on the euro has cooled in recent weeks.

  Tackling migration and security might look more tempting. Unlike
Frexit, tightening borders, limiting immigration and cracking down on foreign
"posted" workers are popular propositions. Last year 71% of French
voters told IFOP, a pollster, that they wanted to scrap Schengen. But that
would create as many problems as it solves. Alain Lamassoure, a French former
Europe minister, notes that there are around 1,500 border crossings between
France and Belgium alone; it is ludicrous to expect them all to be policed.
Full withdrawal from Schengen might also mean losing access to EU police
databases, which would be an odd way for Ms Le Pen to provide the security
she has promised voters.

  She might therefore simply tighten existing controls, stepping up
checks at airports, railway stations and land crossings. Ms Le Pen would also
target foreign-owned firms employing cheap workers from eastern Europe. (Rare
is the French politician who declines to pick on Polish plumbers or Romanian
labourers.) Taxpayer-funded positions would, says Mr de Danne, be subject to
"national preference": ie, French jobs for French workers. Much of
this breaches EU rules, but so what? If Brussels wants to pick a fight, Ms Le
Pen would be delighted to oblige.

  Ms Le Pen's approach to the EU may be to denude it of
authority by endlessly probing its tolerance. Her promises--income- and
corporate-tax cuts, a lower retirement age, more welfare spending--will
shatter the euro-zone's budget-deficit limits. She promises a tax on
imports, and monetary financing of state spending by the central bank. The
European Commission, which has long tolerated mild French profligacy, would
be faced with an acute dilemma. If it allows France to flout the rules, the
glue that holds the EU together melts; why should other countries stick by
their commitments? If it cracks down, it feeds Ms Le Pen's narrative
that Brussels is thwarting the sovereign will of French voters.

  Germany would be left even further adrift. The Franco-German
alliance, as Mrs Merkel reminds Ms Le Pen in "La Presidente", has
always driven the EU forwards. But no German chancellor could do business
with Ms Le Pen. In real life, her first sally abroad would be not to Berlin
but to a summit in Brussels, where she would seek to renegotiate
France's EU membership. It hardly matters if that goes nowhere, for Ms
Le Pen's victory alone would deprive the EU of the oxygen of French
support. At best, this would leave it at a standstill. More likely, it would
atrophy into a loose club propped up by hollow institutions unable to help
governments find solutions to common problems, from trade to migration to
climate change. That, more than anything, is why the prospect of la
presidente should keep Europeans up at night.

