Full Text: 
  Chinese schools discriminate against 60% of the population. This
is both cruel and counterproductive

  LAST year some images went viral on the internet in China. They
showed children descending an 800-metre (2,600-foot) rock face on rickety
ladders made of vines, wood and rusty metal. Their destination: school. The
photographer was told by a local official that "seven or eight"
people had died after losing their grip. Yet the children did this
regularly--there is no school at the top of the mountain in Sichuan province
where they live. The photographs conveyed two striking aspects of life in the
Chinese countryside: a hunger for education so strong that children will risk
their lives for it, and a callous lack of government attention to the needs
of rural students.

  In many ways, education in China is improving. Since 2000 the
annual tally of students graduating from university has increased nearly
eightfold, to more than 7.5m. But many rural students are neglected by
China's school system, and they are not the only ones. So, too, are the
children of migrants who have moved to the cities from the countryside and
poor students who want to go to senior high school.

  This is not only unfair; it is also counterproductive. China faces
a demographic crunch: its workforce is shrinking and it can no longer depend
on cheap, low-skilled migrant labour to power its growth. Its
young--especially those with rural roots--need to become more skilled. That
calls for better education.

  The government has not been completely blind to the need to ensure
that rural people have enough schooling to work in factories, but it has
shown little sense of urgency. The schoolchildren from Sichuan are a case in
point. So perilous was their journey to school that officials arranged for
them to board, like tens of millions of children in rural China. They travel
back home only every few weeks.

  That may sound like progress. Since the population of young people
in the countryside is falling so smaller schools are closing. Better to board
than to trek for miles every day to one that is still open. But conditions at
these boarding schools are often appalling (see page 57). Many children do
not get enough to eat, which affects their health and their ability to learn.
So poor is their nutrition that they are often shorter than their
counterparts at day schools.

  And it is not just the boarders who suffer. In all kinds of
education, rural children have less chance of doing well than their urban
counterparts. Less than 10% of them go to senior high-school, compared with
70% of their peers in cities. That is because the government stacks the
system against them.

  Everyone in China has to attend school for nine years--until the
end of junior high school. But it was not until 2007 that all rural children
could do so without paying. Like city dwellers, they still have to pay for
senior high school. But their families tend to be much poorer, so few can
afford it. And rural schools are far more rudimentary. Local governments are
responsible for running them. If officials have tax revenue to spare, they
see no point in doling it out in the countryside. How can you boost growth,
they wonder, by spending money on villagers who will eventually move away?

  It is no better for the migrants once they are in the cities.
China's household-registration system, known as hukou, treats rural
migrants as second-class citizens. Their children are often barred from
state-funded urban schools. They must pay to send them to ramshackle private
ones instead, which are often worse than rural state schools. Even there,
children's education is frequently disrupted: officials have forced many
such places to close, citing safety and other concerns.

  Who's blocking the schoolhouse door?

  People with rural hukou make up nearly 60% of the population. So
it is vital that the system is scrapped. Everyone in China deserves the same
access to public education, health care and other services. The central
government must also do more to ensure that rural schools have enough money
to teach and feed their pupils--basic education is too important to be left
to ill-motivated local authorities. And it must give more financial support
to the rural poor in order to help their children graduate from high school
and enter university.

  People from the countryside are the unsung heroes of China's
economic rise. The migration of more than 200m of them into cities, where
their labour is more productive than it is in the fields, has been the rocket
fuel of the country's spectacular growth. In China, as elsewhere,
education is what will make society fairer, and ultimately wealthier.

