Full Text: 
  The doges would have loved it

  Covered in barnacles and encrustations, Damien Hirst's new
art is exquisitely crafted. Collectors should be careful, though; art is easy
to buy, but hard to sell

  AN OBSESSIVE art collector, Cif Amotan II, loads a ship, the
Apistos, with treasures for a temple to the sun. But the ship is wrecked at
sea. And the treasures? Forgotten, until recently, when they were
rediscovered, retrieved, restored and put on show. That is the conceit behind
Damien Hirst's new exhibition, "Treasures from the Wreck of the
Unbelievable", a fantastical adventure across Venice at Palazzo Grassi
and Punta della Dogana, the landmark galleries created by Francois Pinault, a
French billionaire who made his money from luxury goods.

  Just inside the main entrance of Palazzo Grassi a huge bronze head
grimaces on the floor. Beside it, dominating the atrium, is an 18m-tall
headless demon adorned with worms and sea plants. The rest of this part of
the show is more domestic in scale, reflecting the building's history as
a luxurious mansion: intricate silver objets d'art; pharaonic busts in
marble and granite; a sculpture of Mr Hirst himself as the mythical
collector. By contrast, the works in the Punta della Dogana, the city's
former customs house, are bigger: room-sized sculptures of warriors covered
in coral, a darkened gallery filled with gold in glittering glass cases.
Think Tomb Raider-meets-the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

  Despite the story about the shipwreck, these artworks were
actually made in Mr Hirst's studios in Britain and by highly trained
European craftsmen, and deposited in the Indian Ocean--off Mozambique, it is
believed--where they were filmed being lifted out of the sand. Excerpts and
stills from the film are shown in both venues.

  Other than a small and much-derided exhibition of his paintings,
"Treasures" is Mr Hirst's first significant show of new work
since 2008, when his market fell dramatically in the wake of an extended
two-day auction at Sotheby's that coincided with the start of the
financial crash. The art world--which will soon descend en masse for the
Venice Biennale--has been alive with speculation that the exhibition will
mark a return to critical and commercial form. The show, which continues
until December 3rd, is Hollywood-epic in scale, 190 sculptures in 50
rooms--and it's all for sale.

  When he became well known, in the 1990s, Mr Hirst could do no
wrong, creating the works that would make him famous: spot paintings,
medicine cabinets and animals in formaldehyde. In the 2000s he defined the
booming art market. In 2007 a pill cabinet sold for $19.2m, making him the
most expensive living artist at auction.

  For a long time Mr Hirst had followed art-market convention,
selling his new work discreetly through his main dealers, Jay Jopling and
Larry Gagosian, in an arrangement known as the "primary market".
Auctions, which are part of the "secondary market", resell old work
rather than fresh work that has never been sold before. Artists make their
money from the primary market, but they earn nothing from secondary-market
sales other than the tiny percentage that comes from droit de suite, or
"artists' resale rights".

  In 2008, Mr Hirst broke all the rules. He took over Sotheby's
London headquarters for "Beautiful Inside My Head Forever", a
two-day auction of 244 new works that fetched $201m, most of which, after
fees and expenses, went to him. Some critics were virulent; others thought it
commercially astute and conceptually brilliant.

  Yet Mr Hirst has never repeated the exercise. That may be because,
even after nearly a decade, the art market is still trying to digest the
Sotheby's sale. Very few works from the "Beautiful" auction
have come back onto the market, and those that have have not done well. In
March, a spin-skull painting from the auction was resold at auction for
[pounds sterling]449,000 ($545,565), just two-thirds of the sterling price it
made in 2008 (and less than half the dollar price).

  Collectors who don't need to sell are holding on to their
works, and the Hirst auction market has shrunk considerably. In 2008, the
year of the Sotheby's sale, $223.3m-worth of Hirst work was sold at
auction; a year later, with the onset of the financial crisis, volume had
slumped to $14.6m. The artist's auction sales in 2016 were lower than in
2009.

  Mr Hirst, meanwhile, has continued to flourish. In a rare
admission, White Cube, Mr Hirst's London gallery, revealed in 2013 that
worldwide sales of his new work the year before had come to $110m. Most
artists split primary sales equally with their galleries; but Mr Hirst has
negotiating power and it is likely he retains more than 50% of any sale,
perhaps as much as 75%. The average value of Mr Hirst's auction sales
has been relatively consistent since 2009, at just over $17m a year,
according to ArtTactic, a specialist research firm. If his primary-market
sales in 2012 were similarly consistent, then Mr Hirst has been making plenty
of money. Which is lucky, because he has certainly been spending it.

  The Venice show may be the most ambitious exhibition ever mounted
by an artist. Mr Hirst says the work cost him more than [pounds sterling]50m
to make, and Mr Pinault has paid several million more to exhibit it. Mr Hirst
clearly is not short of cash. In 2014 he bought a mansion in Regent's
Park, north London, for almost [pounds sterling]40m. He has spent years
renovating a large historic house, Toddington Manor, in Gloucestershire. He
runs large studio operations and has a world-class art collection of more
than 3,000 works. In 2015 he opened a [pounds sterling]25m London gallery
with 25 staff, to show his collection to the public free of charge.

  Early visitors to the Venice show, mostly critics and the press,
were divided in their reactions. The Guardian called it a "titanic
return to form", the Times "a wreck&#8230; [that] should be
dumped at sea". Francesco Bonami, a respected curator, says: "There
is the art world and beyond that another universe, the real world, where
people love his work. I know [this show] will be a huge public success."
Mr Hirst enjoys household recognition, which may explain why the Daily Mail,
a British tabloid newspaper with little interest in art, sent a team of
people to cover the opening. He makes and sells thousands of inexpensive
prints, making his work accessible to almost all, and his retrospective at
Tate Modern in 2012 was one of the museum's most popular shows.

  Meanwhile Mr Hirst's dealers have been offering sculptures
from the show for between $500,000 and $5m. Many pieces, totalling tens of
millions of dollars, are already believed to have sold. If true, then Mr
Hirst's loyal collectors have already cast their ballot on the show,
critical approval or no.

