Full Text: 
  The new generation of Tory MPs will not cause the prime minister
much grief

  WITH the Conservatives far ahead in the polls, Theresa May's
parliamentary party is likely to swell after the election. As well as winning
seats from Labour, the Tories will need to replace a handful of their own MPs
who are stepping down, such as George Osborne, a former chancellor. If the
polls pan out, around 100 new Conservative MPs might soon be taking the oath
of allegiance to the Crown.

  Mrs May hopes that this will provide her with a cushion of
moderate MPs to dilute the influence of the three-dozen or so
ultra-Brexiteers on her backbenches, making it easier for her to compromise
in the Brexit negotiations. But will the new MPs be hard or soft Brexiteers?

  It is partly a question of which seats are up for grabs. In the
100 constituencies where the Conservatives need the smallest swing in order
to win, support for Brexit is similar to that in the country as a whole.
Around a third of them delivered majorities for Remain. That calls for Tory
candidates who are not too hardline on Brexit. In places like the Labour
marginal of Brentford and Isleworth in south-west London (fourth on the Tory
hit list) local Conservatives say they consider a candidate's support
for "social justice" to be as important as anything else. A Tory
official in Ealing Central and Acton, another Remain-backing London
constituency that is second on the hit list, wants a "Tory with a
heart".

  The tight timetable should help Mrs May to choose sympathetic
candidates. Normally, local Conservative associations spend months carefully
choosing their parliamentary candidate. Activists tend to be to the right of
the parliamentary party, and most would dearly love to choose hard-Brexit
candidates. Garry Heath, a member of the Wycombe Conservative Association,
wrote on the ConservativeHome blog that the Tories should "purge our
party and deselect the Remainers".

  Yet with the election only seven weeks away, there is little time
for local parties to scour the land for suitable hardliners. Conservative
Central Office is expected to step in and present local associations with a
shortlist of candidates. These lists will reflect Mrs May's politics; in
turn, the candidates will be loyal to her if elected.

  The easiest option in many cases will be simply to reselect the
candidate who stood in the 2015 election. Back then, most of the party's
leadership was in favour of Remaining, albeit reluctantly. Whatever happens,
it looks as if Mrs May's prospective new MPs are unlikely to give her
too much trouble.

