Full Text: 
  Why gold has not responded to geopolitical risk or reflation talk

  AMERICA has bombed Syria, and its relations with Russia have
deteriorated. North Korea is developing a long-range nuclear missile, a
development which Donald Trump has vowed to stop, unilaterally if necessary.
There is talk of a "reflation trade", with tax cuts in America
pepping up global growth.

  All this ought to be good news for gold, the precious metal that
usually gains at times of political uncertainty or rising inflation
expectations. But as the chart shows, gold took a hit when Mr Trump was
elected in November and is still well below its level of last July. As a
watchdog, gold has failed to bark.

  Bullion enjoyed a ten-year bull market from 2001 to 2011, when it
peaked at $1,898 an ounce. This long upward run was bolstered in its later
stages by two developments: first, the use of quantitative easing (QE) by
central banks, which gold bugs argued would inevitably lead to high
inflation; and second by the euro crisis, which caused nervousness about the
potential for a break-up of the single currency and about the safety of
European banks. By 2013, however, euro-zone worries were fading and, despite
QE, no inflation had been seen. The gold price fell sharply and has stayed in
a narrow range since.

  Last year was a disappointing one for jewellery demand, with an
annual survey by Thomson Reuters finding that jewellery fabrication fell by
38% in India (where it was hit by a new excise duty) and by 17% in China. The
Chinese central bank was also a less enthusiastic gold-purchaser than before:
net central-bank buying dropped to a seven-year low.

  The big change in the gold market since the turn of the millennium
has been the rise of exchange-traded funds (ETFs), which have made it easy
for investors to get exposure to the metal without worrying about storing it
or insuring it. At the peak, gold ETFs held around 2,500 tonnes of gold,
according to Citigroup, worth around $100bn at today's prices.

  Gold ETFs were bought as a classic "momentum trade" by
investors who try to make money by following trends. Once the price trend
changed in 2013, such investors scrambled to get out of the metal. At the
moment ETFs hold just 1,800 tonnes.

  The problem with gold is that there is no obvious valuation
measure. The metal pays no real "earnings". Although gold is seen
as a hedge against inflation, it cannot be relied on to fulfil this function
over the medium term; between 1980 and 2001, its price fell by more than 80%
in real terms.

  The general rule is that gold is seen as an alternative currency
to the dollar, so when the greenback does well, bullion does badly. But this
also means that gold's performance can look rather better in other,
weaker currencies. Since the Brexit referendum, for example, bullion is up by
19% in sterling terms. Another factor is real interest rates. When they are
high, the opportunity cost of holding gold is also high. Conversely, very low
interest rates mean that there seems little to lose by holding gold.

  Those two factors explain why the "Trump trade" was
initially not very good for gold. In the immediate aftermath of the election,
investors hoped that tax cuts would revive the American economy; this would
force the Federal Reserve to push up interest rates and that rate boost would
drive the dollar higher. Neither prospect would be good for gold.

  But the Trump trade has lost momentum. The president's
failure to repeal Obamacare has raised doubts about the prospect of a
tax-reform programme being passed by Congress. Gold has duly perked up a bit
since the start of the year, and the price rose by 1.6% on April 11th. But,
although inflation may be a bit higher, nothing suggests a return to the kind
of double-digit rates seen in the 1970s, when gold enjoyed a spectacular
price rise.

  Even so, the metal has not performed as well as it might have
done, given the geopolitical headlines. Perhaps this is because Mr Trump has
backed away from some of his pre-election threats--on trade with China, for
example. The bombing in Syria may turn out to be a one-off, and his
statements on North Korea could be "full of sound and fury, signifying
nothing". With the help of advisers such as Rex Tillerson, the secretary
of state, and James Mattis, the defence secretary, Mr Trump may turn out to
be a more conventional foreign-policy president than expected.

  So buying bullion is really a bet that things will go
spectacularly wrong: that events escalate in the Middle East and North Korea
or that central banks lose control of monetary policy. It could happen, of
course, but it helps explain why gold bugs tend to be folks with a rather
gloomy attitude towards life.

  Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

