Full Text: 
  India's biometric identity scheme is a marvel. But it should
be voluntary

  WHAT would Gandhi have made of Aadhaar, the ambitious scheme to
provide each of India's 1.3bn residents with a unique, biometrically
verifiable identification? There is much that might have impressed the great
pacifist. Before Aadhaar's launch in 2010, many Indians had no proof of
identity that could be recognised across the sprawling, multilingual country;
now 99% of adults do. A cheap, simple and accurate way to know who is who, it
helps the state channel services, such as subsidies, to those who really need
them, thwarting corruption and saving billions. Linked to bank accounts and
mobile phones, the unique 12-digit numbers can be used for swift, easy
transfers of money. In time, they should help hundreds of millions of Indians
enter the formal, modern economy.

  Yet Gandhi might also have been alarmed. After all, he cut his
political teeth resisting a scheme to impose identity passes on unwilling
Indians. That was over a century ago, in South Africa. Aadhaar could scarcely
be further removed in intent from colonial racism: it is designed to include
and unite, not exclude. Still, many Indians worry that a programme billed as
voluntary is increasingly, with little public debate, being made mandatory.
This puts the whole project, and all its benefits, at risk of being struck
down by the courts. And the government's high-handed dismissal of
concerns about its methods is stoking fears that it might misuse the data it
has collected.

  In recent months the government of Narendra Modi, the prime
minister, has made access to a dozen government programmes contingent on
possession of an Aadhaar card (see page 51). In March it sneakily inserted
into a fast-tracked budget bill a rule that requires taxpayers to link their
tax number with Aadhaar. There is talk of adding such things as school
lunches and the purchase of airline tickets to this list. In answer to a
question in parliament about whether the state was, in effect, forcing
citizens into the Aadhaar scheme, the reply from India's minister of
finance was blunt: "Yes, we are."

  This would appear to contradict India's Supreme Court. Its
judges have yet to rule on a score of petitions aimed at stopping Aadhaar,
but in the past two years the court has issued several statements asserting
that the identity scheme should be voluntary--or at any rate that it should
remain so until the court decides otherwise. Until it issues a binding
opinion, the danger lingers that a pile of important government schemes could
in future find themselves dangling in legal limbo.

  In theory, the law on Aadhaar passed last year by Mr Modi's
government includes stringent protections against the sharing of information;
its rules allowing exceptions on grounds of national security, although
vaguely worded, appear well intended. Sweden has required all citizens to
have a national ID number since 1947--the year of India's birth--with
little trouble. Most Swedes consider the scheme, which is linked to tax,
school, medical and other records, an immense convenience.

  Stockholm on the Ganges

  But India is not a tidy Nordic kingdom. Mr Modi's government,
with its strident nationalism and occasional recklessness--such as last
year's abrupt voiding of most of the paper currency in circulation--does
not always inspire confidence that it will respect citizens' rights and
legal niceties. By sneaking the linkage between Aadhaar and tax into a budget
bill, it raises concerns about intent: will the government stalk tax evaders,
or perhaps enemies of the state, using ostensibly "fire-walled"
Aadhaar data? Many Indians will remember that, following sectarian riots in
the past, ruling parties were accused of using voter rolls to target victims.

  Mr Modi, who before taking office dismissed Aadhaar as a
"political gimmick", has been right to seize on its potential to
transform India. It can bring more efficiency to government, convenience to
citizens and savings to businesses that need to identify their customers. But
for Aadhaar to fulfil its potential, Indians must trust that it will not be
misused. Adopting coercive regulations, ignoring the Supreme Court's
qualms and dismissing critics peremptorily will achieve the opposite. As for
the Supreme Court, it should stop dithering and make its views clear. Gandhi,
a lawyer as well as an activist, would certainly have approved of that.

