Full Text: 
  IN A patch of east London, somewhere between the urban and the
wild, a love triangle emerges--between a woman, her ex-boyfriend and a fox.
This is the premise of "How to be Human", a debut novel by Paula
Cocozza, a British journalist. It is a thrilling psychodrama that twists and
turns with the residents of a few houses and their adjacent woods.

  Mary, the story's protagonist, has broken up with Mark, her
domineering fiance, but their destructive relationship has sucked her life
dry. Then a fox arrives in her unkempt garden; at first he is a pest and then
a friend. He brings her "gifts", which she finds increasingly full
of meaning: a pair of boxer shorts, a gardening glove, an egg. Everything
normal in her life starts to slip, but she has something far more valuable,
"her fox".

  As with other works that cross the bestial line--the horse
fixation in Peter Shaffer's "Equus" or "The Goat or Who
Is Sylvia?" by Edward Albee--this is a disturbing narrative about sanity
and obsession. But Ms Cocozza makes a further point about the supposed
civility of humans. Are people's urban lives natural? She brilliantly
captures a sense of Hitchcockian, curtain-twitching intensity as Mary and her
terraced neighbours struggle to escape each other. While Mary, through the
wall, hears Michelle's sobs, induced by postnatal depression, Michelle
lashes out at Mary, "You think I haven't seen you&#8230;
creeping around at night."

  In pleasant contrast to this claustrophobic human world comes that
of the book's vulpine star, known as "Red",
"Flight", "Sunset" or "Fox". In lyrical,
disjointed prose Ms Cocozza describes how he naps, eats beetles and scents
the neighbourhood; spraying, wiping, squeezing, twisting and dropping his
"amazing smell cloud". He conducts himself in a far more refined
manner than the humans, who get drunk, become abusive, throw things and try
to control one another.

  Mary embraces the freedom of the feral; but as her walk to the
wilder side progresses, it becomes unclear whether this is the cure she needs
or if things are spiralling dangerously out of control. Like the scent of a
fox, truth and fact in "How to Be Human" start to evaporate. What
is left behind is a pervasive sense that beneath the veneer of civility,
something wilder is always lurking.

  How to be Human.

  By Paula Cocozza.

