Full Text: 
  Voters no longer seem to care much about growth

  PUNDITS and political scientists don't always agree. When it
comes to predicting electoral outcomes, though, both tribes assume that the
economy is the most reliable oracle. Numerous studies have found a strong
correlation between GDP growth and voting behaviour. Whether or not those in
power are responsible for the economy, it has been responsible for whether or
not they get re-elected.

  A study by Ruth Dassonneville, now at the University of Montreal,
and Michael Lewis-Beck of the University of Iowa makes the relationship
clear. They examined economic performance and elections in 31 European
countries from 1952 to 2013. After controlling for other factors, such as the
number of parties in an election, a 1% increase in GDP was associated with an
increase of nearly three-quarters of a percentage point in support for the
incumbent government.

  But things are changing. Fewer voters now identify with particular
parties, making elections more volatile. Since 2008, incumbent governments
have lost on average seven percentage points of support between elections, up
from three points in the 1980s.

  You might think that more voters shopping around between parties
would increase the importance of objective measures such as economic
performance. Instead, the opposite has occurred. Updating data provided by Ms
Dassonneville and Mr Lewis-Beck, The Economist has carried out a
cross-country analysis of post-war elections in Western Europe. Although
there was a correlation between GDP growth and voter behaviour before the
financial crisis, we could find none since then (see chart).

  Voters have become deeply hostile towards governing parties, who
now lose support regardless of how well the economy is faring. Incumbent
governments have lost votes between elections in 29 out of 35 elections since
2008. Seven years after the start of the euro crisis, European economies are
at last recovering. But if governments think more money in voters'
pockets will keep them in power, they are in for a nasty surprise.

