Full Text: 
  Out of sight, not out of mind

  Out of sight, not out of mind

  Finland shows the way with a project expected to span 100,000
years

  A STEEP 5km ramp corkscrews down from the mouth of a tunnel
(pictured above) into the bowels of the Earth. At the bottom, a yellow rig is
drilling boreholes into the rock face, preparing it for blasting. The air is
chilly, but within a few years, it may feel more like a Finnish sauna. Buried
in holes in the floor will be copper canisters, 5.2 metres long, containing
the remains of some of the world's most radioactive nuclear waste. When
the drilling is finished, in a century or so, 3,250 canisters each containing
half a tonne of spent fuel will be buried in up to 70km of tunnels. Then the
entire area will be sealed to make it safe for posterity.

  The hundred-year timescale already means this is a megaproject.
But that is just the beginning. The radioactive isotopes of plutonium used in
nuclear-power plants must be stored for tens of thousands of years before
they are safe. Finland aims to isolate its stockpile in the Onkalo
repository, a burial chamber beneath the small forested island of Olkiluoto,
home to one of its two nuclear-power plants, for at least 100,000 years.

  In geological terms, that is a heartbeat; Finland's bedrock
is 1.9bn years old. But in human terms, 4,000 generations are almost
inconceivable. As Mika Pohjonen, the managing director of Posiva, the
utility-owned Finnish company overseeing the project, says, no one knows
whether humans, creatures (or machines) will rule the Earth above by
then--let alone whether they will be able to read today's safety
manuals. A hundred thousand years ago, Finland was under an ice sheet and
Homo sapiens had not yet reached Europe.

  Posiva has commissioned studies on the possibility that in the
intervening millennia the area could be inundated by rising seas caused by
global warming, or buried beneath a few kilometres of ice once more.
Scientists have studied Greenland as an analogue to ice-capped Finland. The
firm's assurance to future generations is that if, in tens of thousands
of years, a future Finn digs a 400-metre-deep well and draws water
contaminated with 21st-century nuclear waste, it will be safe to drink.

  But Posiva's immediate priority is to create disposal caverns
far enough from rock fissures and groundwater that Finland's nuclear
authorities allow it to start moving the canisters to their tomb in the early
2020s. "This is drilling with silk gloves on," Mr Pohjonen says, as
the machine pounds the rock with a deafening roar. "It has to be done
gently."

  Nuclear authorities around the world are watching with interest
because in the past two years Finland has become the first country to license
and start building a final repository for highly radioactive waste fuel from
nuclear reactors. Experts at the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), a
global body, say other countries, such as Sweden and France, are close
behind. In America, Donald Trump's administration has included a budget
request for $120m to restart construction of a high-level waste repository at
Yucca Mountain in Nevada, chosen in 1987 but stalled since 2010.

  Delayed gratification

  The disposal of nuclear fuel is among the most intractable of
infrastructure projects. And there are already 266,000 tonnes of it in
storage around the world, about 70,000 tonnes more than there were a decade
ago. As Markku Lehtonen, a Finnish academic at the University of Sussex, puts
it, the costs are high; the benefits are about avoiding harm rather than
adding value; and evaluation is not about assessing risk, but about dealing
with "uncertainty, ambiguity and ignorance" over a protracted
timescale. Not everyone is convinced that permanent disposal is urgent,
either. Some argue that semi-cooled fuel could be kept in cement dry-storage
casks, as much is in America, for generations until technologies are
developed to handle it. A blue-ribbon commission in America in 2012 mentioned
the benefits of keeping spent fuel in storage for a longer time in order to
keep the options open. But it also said that final storage was essential.

  For all the countries committed to burial, Finland represents an
overdue step in the right direction. It offers two lessons. The first is to
find a relatively stable geological area, and reliable storage technology.
The second is to build a broad consensus that the waste can be handled and
disposed of responsibly. Like other Nordic success stories, it will be hard
to replicate. "Finland has a kind of unique institutional context: a
high trust in experts and representative democracy," says Matti Kojo, of
Finland's Tampere University. "You cannot just copy a model from
Finland."

  Under solid ground

  The geological part, though the timespan is greatest, is probably
the least tricky. Finland began the search for a site in 1983, shortly after
it began generating nuclear power, and chose Olkiluoto after reviewing 100
areas. It has mapped faults and fissures in the bedrock, and sited the
repository in a seismic "quiet zone". It says it will avoid burying
canisters close to potential pressure points, to minimise the danger that
rock movements would crush or tear the canisters and cause radioactive
leakage. Finland's Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority (STUK) called
Posiva's analysis of the bedrock and groundwater "state of the
art".

  Ismo Aaltonen, Posiva's chief geologist, says that
earthquakes cannot be ruled out, especially if the bedrock shifts upwards in
the melting period after a future ice age. Olkiluoto is still rising as it
rebounds from the pressure of the last one, which ended more than 10,000
years ago. Close to the repository's entrance, he points to scratchmarks
on the rocks--"footprints of the last ice age" left by the
retreating ice cap. But whether in crystalline granite, as in Finland and
Sweden, or clay, as in France, or volcanic rock, as in Yucca Mountain,
nuclear experts are confident that deep geological disposal can be safe.
"There is a great deal of evidence that we can find many sites in the
world with adequate geological properties for the required safety," says
Stefan Mayer, a waste-disposal expert at the IAEA.

  Technology is the next hurdle. As well as 400-500 metres of
bedrock between the canisters and the surface, there will be several man-made
layers: steel, copper, water-absorbent bentonite clay around the canisters,
and bentonite plugs sealing the caverns and, eventually, the access tunnel.

  A model in the visitor's centre, with moving parts that
replicate all this in miniature, makes the whole set-up look safer than Fort
Knox. Posiva says it has modelled copper deposits in ancient rocks to assess
the likelihood of corrosion. STUK, however, says it will need more study on
the potential for the copper to deteriorate. Some academics, including Mr
Kojo, are worried that the Finnish media have underplayed concerns about
copper corrosion, compared with other countries with similar
"multi-barrier" protection systems.

  The trickiest challenge, though, is to build broader societal
consent. Finland appears to have succeeded by starting early and sticking to
its timetable. The decision to find a site and start disposing of nuclear
waste in the 2020s was taken 40 years ago. In 1994 its parliament banned the
import and export of spent nuclear fuel, which increased the pressure to find
a home-grown solution. Few other countries have demonstrated the same
determination. The good news is that, because waste needs to be cooled in
tanks for 30-50 years before being disposed of, emerging nuclear powerhouses
such as China have time to prepare.

  Finns' trust in their nuclear industry has remained high,
despite accidents elsewhere, such as those at Chernobyl in 1986 and Fukushima
in 2011. Finland's four nuclear reactors operate at among the
world's highest utilisation rates, and supply 26% of its electricity.
Its two nuclear utilities, TVO and Fortum, which co-own Posiva, are
themselves part of an electricity system in which Finnish industries and many
municipalities have a stake, bolstering public support. The Onkalo repository
is situated next door to TVO's two working Olkiluoto reactors, which
means people nearby are--in the phrase of academics--"nuclearised",
that is, convinced of the benefits of nuclear power. Surveys suggest positive
attitudes to nuclear power nationally exceed negative ones.

  Finns' trust in government as a whole is high. Vesa
Lakaniemi, the mayor of the 9,300-strong municipality of Eurajoki in which
Olkiluoto lies (who once did a summer job at TVO), says it did not take much
to persuade locals to support the site. Income from the nuclear industry
gives them slightly lower taxes, good public services and a restored mansion
for the elderly. They trust the waste will be handled safely and
transparently. "It's Finnish design. Finnish rock is solid rock.
Regulation is strict everywhere in the world but Finnish people do these
things very well," he says.

  Faith in the future

  Some academics worry that Finland is taking waste disposal too
much on faith. Any mishap could erode trust in an instant, as happened in
Japan, another "high-trust" society, after the Fukushima disaster.
TVO admits that negative attitudes towards nuclear power have risen as the
construction of its third reactor at Olkiluoto has been plagued by delays,
cost overruns and squabbles with the French-German contractors. The
experience has shown that STUK tolerates no shortcuts, but some fear that its
relationship with Posiva sometimes appears too close. Sweden and France have
moved towards licensing repositories with far more criticism from NGOs and
the media, suggesting more robust engagement.

  Other countries, including America and France, follow principles
of reversibility or retrievability, meaning they can reverse the disposal
process while it is under way or retrieve waste after burial, if technologies
and social attitudes change. Finland's model is more closed; it would
take a huge amount of digging to recover the waste once it has been sealed.
But analysts say there is no single correct approach. Britain, for instance,
has done things by the book but still failed to find a place for a
repository.

  Finally, there is the matter of cost. Finland's nuclear-waste
kitty, collected from the utilities, currently stands at [euro]2.5bn
($2.7bn). By the time it is closed, the price is expected to be [euro]3.5bn.
That is reassuringly modest for a 100-year project, partly reflecting the
fact that Finland's nuclear industry, even when the planned total of
five reactors are up and running, is relatively small. Other countries have
higher costs, and less discipline. Yucca Mountain, for instance, was once
estimated to cost $96bn to complete. In 2012 America had $27bn in its
disposal fund, collected from ratepayers, none of which has gone towards
nuclear-waste management.

  It may be hard to replicate Finland's exact model, but its
sense of responsibility is seen as an inspiration. When visiting the Finnish
repository, authorities from elsewhere, be they American, Chinese,
Australian, Japanese or British, learn that safeguarding the future is not
just a question of seismology, technology, sociology and cash. It is also an
ethical one.

