Full Text: 
  Dosing pregnant mice with penicillin changes their
offsprings' behaviour

  THE symbiosis between human beings and the bacteria dwelling in
their guts is a delicate thing. When it works well, both sides benefit. The
bugs get a comfy home. The hosts get help with their digestion, making more
food available than otherwise would be. If relations are upset, though, bad
consequences may flow. Both obesity and malnutrition can be exacerbated by
the wrong gut bacteria. Illnesses such as asthma and eczema are linked to a
lack of certain bugs from an infant's intestines. And there is evidence,
from experiments on mice, that an absence of gut flora affects the
development of the brain. Such absence weakens the blood-brain barrier, which
normally helps to keep foreign material out of that organ. It also seems to
make animals less sociable than would otherwise be expected.

  The experiments which show these brain and behavioural changes
have, though, either been done on mice raised in sterile conditions or on
ones that have had their alimentary bacterial ecosystems "nuked"
with antibiotics in high dose--far higher, pro rata, than would be
administered to a human for medical reasons. The next stage is to test
whether anything similar happens to mice fed more realistic doses of
antibiotics. And this is what Sophie Leclercq of McMaster University, in
Hamilton, Ontario, has now done.

  Dr Leclercq and her colleagues, who have just published their
results in Nature Communications, laced the drinking water of some pregnant
female mice with medically appropriate levels of penicillin, starting a week
before those females were due to give birth, and carrying on three weeks
after birth, to the point where their offspring were weaned (penicillin is
known to be transferred from mother to pup in milk). One group of
mothers-to-be had only the antibiotic added to their water. A second had a
bacterium called Lactobacillus rhamnosus, a so-called probiotic that has been
demonstrated experimentally to be good for the intestinal health of mice,
added as well. A third group of expectant mothers were given their drinking
water unadulterated. Twenty-five pups were born to mothers in the first
group, 19 to the second and 28 to the third.

  Six weeks post partum, the researchers tested the sociability of
the various offspring by putting them, one at a time, for ten minutes, into a
small, Y-shaped tunnel with two chambers at the ends. One chamber contained
another mouse, of the same sex as the experimental animal, held in a small
wire cage. The second contained an empty cage.

  The team found that, when released into this apparatus, the
offspring of mothers exposed only to penicillin preferred to be alone. They
spent more time in the empty chamber (four and a half minutes, on average)
than in the chamber containing another mouse (three and three-quarter
minutes). Those born of mothers exposed neither to penicillin nor to
Lactobacillus showed the reverse pattern, averaging only three and a half
minutes in the empty chamber and almost five in the chamber that gave them
company. Those mice born of mothers given both penicillin and Lactobacillus
fell between these extremes, averaging a bit under four and a half minutes in
the chamber that gave them company, and three and three-quarters in the empty
one. In all cases there was no significant difference between the sexes.

  Dr Leclercq got similar results when she tested the preferences of
her mice for social novelty. She did this by letting them choose, in the
tunnel, between a new mouse and the one they had already met. She found those
exposed to penicillin alone less interested in the new mouse than those
exposed to both penicillin and Lactobacillus, or to neither.

  She also found that exposure to penicillin alone made male mice
more aggressive. She arranged for males in the experiment to be threatened by
an unfamiliar male belonging to a strain known for being big and hostile.
Males born of mothers given unadulterated drinking water all quickly assumed
a submissive posture when confronted with such a stranger. Half of the males
born of mothers treated with the antibiotic did not, however, submit. Indeed,
they fought back even though they were clearly outmatched--as did a fifth of
the males whose mothers had been treated simultaneously with the antibiotic
and Lactobacillus.

  All these results are in line with the hypothesis that low doses
of antibiotic affect behaviour similarly to high doses. So, when Dr Leclercq
and her colleagues killed and examined their animals shortly after the
behavioural tests, they expected to see permeable blood-brain barriers in the
mice exposed to penicillin. But they did not. They actually saw the reverse:
the blood-brain barriers of mice exposed solely to penicillin were far less
permeable than those of the other two groups.

  What is going on--and, in particular, what relationship (if any)
exists between the effects of gut flora on the blood-brain barrier and on
behaviour--remains to be seen. But Dr Leclercq and her colleagues have
demonstrated that medically relevant doses of penicillin, even when
administered via the mother rather than directly, can have palpable effects
on young mice. Whether the same applies to young people, just before or after
birth, is surely a matter worth investigating.

