Full Text: 
  No underdog

  "SOME kind of angel married to some kind of god!" So
seemed Jane Welsh Carlyle and her husband, Thomas, to a friend in 1845. Her
wit and his fame--as the author of "The French Revolution" (1837)
and "On Heroes, Hero-Worship and the Heroic in History" (1841),
among other books--had shot them into the literary firmament. Poets,
novelists, philosophers and revolutionaries all beat a path to their door in
Cheyne Row, Chelsea.

  But the image was a fantasy. Thomas was a curmudgeon, a
"self-tortured, aggravating mystery of a man" as Kathy Chamberlain
writes in her new book, and a prize chauvinist besides. "The Man should
rule in the house and not the Woman," he warned his bride-to-be. But
Jane was a born ironist with "a genius", she said later, "for
not being ruled!" No angel then, but fun. One friend saw dinner guests
seated beside her "in incessant fits of laughter!", and her letters
echo her talk--mocking, self-mocking, mercurial, "splashing off whatever
is on my mind", in Jane's words.

  Letters are the stuff of this engaging book. Though the marriage
was not happy (Ms Chamberlain is wary of tales that it was unconsummated),
Thomas and Jane wrote constantly whenever separated--curiously in need of
each other, the author observes, and "attuned&#8230;to each
other's words". Wisely, Ms Chamberlain focuses on a few interesting
years, 1843 to 1849, a time of revolution. Her book is crowded with people
and stories--overcrowded even, and a little rough at the edges. But one
persistent and fascinating thread is Jane's search for what she called
her "I-ity", her "self-subsisting and alas! self-seeking
Me". Sometimes it was a craving for confirmation; she glowed after a
visit from Alfred Lord Tennyson to "talk with me! by myself me!"
Sometimes it was a longing for a mission, a purpose.

  Above all, it was her need to write. She knew her worth. When
Thomas praised her "charming bits of Letters", she flew at him:
"as if I were some nice little Child writing&#8230;to its God
papa&#8230;let us hear no more of my bits of Letters". She was after
bigger fish--authenticity, "as it flies", she wrote. Chiding a
cousin for her reserve, she demanded "the real transcript of your mind
at the moment": "if a sadness, or a longing, or a perplexity, or a
bedeviledness falls on you&#8230;then down with it on paper--tho'
only six lines or six words".

  Jane never published. She could cope with the
"transcript" only in private; couldn't even write it down, she
said, if there was anyone else in the room. A draft novel by two friends
shocked her precisely by its authenticity: by the "exposure of their
whole minds naked as before the fall". With one brief exception, the
thought of publication froze her own attempts at formal writing. But then
there was always someone in the room--Thomas's heroes gazing from the
shelves, high among them the writer himself, "The Hero as Man of
Letters", hailed by him as "our most important modern person".
No wonder she kept her head down.

  Jane Welsh Carlyle and Her Victorian World: A Story of Love, Work,
Friendship, and Marriage.

  By Kathy Chamberlain.

