Full Text: 
  An all-American product finds new takers

  EARLY spring is the main selling season for recreational vehicles
(RVs) and the phone on Tom Troiano's desk has been ringing incessantly.
The owner of Continental RV, a dealership in Farmingdale, a village on Long
Island, Mr Troiano is on track to sell more RVs this year than in any other
since the early 2000s. Buoyed by cheap financing, rising wages and
inexpensive gas, travellers are once again splurging on big-ticket camper
vans.

  RVs are a quintessentially American invention: more than
two-thirds are made in the United States. Nationally, sales surged to 430,000
units last year, a 40-year high. At the inexpensive end they sell for as
little as $5,000 for a caravan; deluxe versions cost up to $1m and are
typically equipped with a bedroom, kitchen and bathroom that are bigger than
in many European flats. The share prices of Thor Industries, the biggest
RV-manufacturer in America, and Winnebago, the third-largest, have risen by
43% and 17%, respectively, in the past year.

  That is a big change. During the 2008-09 recession, notes Mr
Troiano, RV dealerships everywhere closed down, leaving his shop among the
very few left serving the New York metropolitan area. The current rebound is
mostly owing to the economy's recovery, but it also springs from the
fact that new types of customer are embracing the lifestyle.

  A decade ago the average age of an RV-owner was 49, and over 90%
were white, says Kevin Broom of the Recreational Vehicle Industry Association
(RVIA), an industry body. That didn't bode well for the future. But
stereotypes are being dented. Anecdotal reports suggest that ethnic
minorities now make up around a sixth of all new customers, says Mr Broom.
The fastest-growing customer demographic is 35- to 44-year-olds. Another
boost comes from affluent immigrants, who are keen to experience long,
self-planned road trips in America. Mr Troiano's most recent big sale
was to a rich Asian family.

  The industry hopes that its poor record with foreign sales--last
year less than 1% of RVs produced domestically were shipped to foreign
markets (excluding Canada)--may improve, too. China's government, for
example, has pledged to build 2,000 campgrounds by 2020, up from an estimated
300 today, in a bid to promote domestic tourism, particularly to remote rural
regions. Chinese firms such as Yutong Bus make RVs, but not of the quality
that many Chinese want. The country imported 1,000 vehicles last year, over
half of them American.

  RV manufacturers are also marketing the notion that their motor
homes can be commercial as well as leisure vehicles. They can allow
travelling salesmen, businessmen and university-admissions officers to save
on food and hotel costs, for example, when they hit the road trying to
recruit prospective new clients and students. The office, as well as home,
can be wherever you park it.

