Full Text: 
  Eat your heart out, Stanford

  For real knowledge, not just a degree, come to Ameerpet

  UNIVERSITY campuses can take a while to get going in the mornings,
as students recover from extra-curricular antics. Contrast that with
Ameerpet, a squeezed neighbourhood of Hyderabad that has become India's
unofficial cramming-college capital. By 7.30am the place is already buzzing
as 500-odd training institutes cater to over 100,000 students looking to
improve their IT skills. If there are ivory towers here, they are obscured by
a forest of fluorescent billboards promising skills ranging from debugging
Oracle servers to expertise in Java coding to handling Microsoft's
cloud.

  Expertise in the IT industry erodes fast as software programs are
upgraded or become obsolete. Indian outsourcing giants such as Infosys and
Wipro spend heavily to keep employees' skills up to date. But staff
looking to change their career paths--to say nothing of those who didn't
crack the interview in the first place--need rapid systems upgrades of their
own. Training courses authorised by software providers exist but cost up to
375,000 rupees ($5,765). Fees at Ameerpet's informal institutes are
typically below 25,000 rupees for classes lasting three to six months.

  The glitziest of Ameerpet's establishments have some of the
trappings of MBA programmes: they dish out business cards to students they
call "trainee associates" and help them polish their CVs. But many
courses that are in high demand from students from across the country are
taught in primitive classrooms filled with plastic chairs. Costs are low in
part because institutes use pirated software, avoiding expensive licences.
Raids occur sometimes, and the servers have to be wiped clean. But help is at
hand to reinstall the software quickly. It is what the attendees will soon be
paid to do, after all, once they land a job.

  The focus in Ameerpet is on teaching salary-boosting skills at
warp speed. Many instructors are moonlighting from their own IT jobs. In the
classroom they use projects that simulate real-world scenarios. Study
material is repeatedly refreshed to reflect current job descriptions at
leading IT firms across India, not an outdated curriculum. "In college
you get a degree. You come to Ameerpet for education," says Narasimham
Peri, a researcher at Britain's Bristol University.

  Ameerpet succeeds because it fills the gap between Indian
IT's global reach and the poor education Indians receive outside a top
tier of engineering colleges. According to a government report published last
month, three-fifths of engineering graduates in India are unemployable. Over
half of the country's 3,300-odd engineering colleges are not up to
standard. Nasscom, a lobby group for the IT industry, estimates that only
three out of every ten faculty members who teach are qualified. Prestigious
government-run institutes are reluctant to allocate more seats for students
and believe that quality comes through squeezing supply. "That's
terrible," says Mohandas Pai, a former director at Infosys.

  Even so, it is surprising that Ameerpet is as busy as it is.
Routine IT-maintenance tasks of the sort done by its graduates, after all,
can increasingly be assigned to machines. Hiring by the Indian IT sector is
at a ten-year low and some firms are even shedding workers. But Ameerpet will
prevail, says Suresh Golla, who runs a popular coaching class there. He has
started to stream lectures to woo foreign students, who are willing to pay
far more than Indians. And there are still plenty of local aspirants keen to
gatecrash careers that their formal educational qualifications suggest they
do not deserve.

