Full Text: 
  Just when the opposition seemed moribund, Aleksei Navalny brings
it to life

  NOBODY inside or outside Russia saw it coming. The government
seemed to have established complete control over politics, marginalising the
opposition with nationalist adventures in Ukraine and Syria. Vladimir
Putin's approval rating had stabilised at more than 80%. After Donald
Trump's victory in America, the Kremlin had proclaimed the threat of
global liberalism to be over. And yet on March 26th, 17 years to the day
after Mr Putin was first elected, tens of thousands of Russians took to the
streets in nearly 100 cities to demonstrate against corruption, in the
largest protests since 2012.

  The protests began in Vladivostok and rolled across the country to
Moscow and St Petersburg, which saw the largest crowds. Riot police arrested
more than 1,000 people in Moscow alone. The state media ignored the
demonstrations; the top Russian search engine, Yandex, manipulated its
results to push reports of them down the page. The Kremlin was speechless.

  The marches came in response to a call from Aleksei Navalny, an
opposition leader and anti-corruption campaigner who wants to run for
president next year. Despite the government's crackdown on activism, Mr
Navalny has doggedly continued publishing exposes of corruption on social
networks and YouTube, and expanding his volunteer organisation. His latest
target is Dmitry Medvedev, the prime minister. On March 2nd Mr Navalny
released a film alleging that Mr Medvedev had used charities and shell
companies to amass a collection of mansions, yachts and other luxuries. The
video has been watched 15m times on the internet.

  The decision to target Mr Medvedev was strategic. Whereas Mr Putin
is praised for restoring Russia's geopolitical power, Mr Medvedev is
seen as weak and held responsible for Russia's economic woes. He is
often ridiculed for his taste for Western gadgets and frequent gaffes.
("We have no money, but you hang in there," he told pensioners in
Crimea last year.) He is equally disliked by security-service hardliners,
such as Igor Sechin, Mr Putin's closest confidant, and by moderate
technocrats such as Aleksei Kudrin, a former finance minister. Yet the
protests were not restricted to Mr Medvedev. Denis Lugovskoi, an engineering
student who demonstrated in Orel, 325km (200 miles) south of Moscow, says
they were aimed at the whole political elite.

  Although the crowds were thinner than those in Moscow in 2011-12,
they were in some respects more alarming for the Kremlin. The protests of
five years ago, sparked by rigged parliamentary elections, were largely
confined to Moscow and St Petersburg, and deliberately lacked unified
leadership; the educated, urbane protesters considered this a sign of
political maturity. Now both demography and geography are much broader.
Protests took place in industrial towns in the heartland, such as Nizhny
Tagil and Chelyabinsk, and in poorer cities such as Nizhny Novgorod.
Meanwhile, Mr Navalny has become the movement's clear leader. On March
27th a court sentenced him to 15 days in jail for organising an unauthorised
demonstration.

  The crowds also reflected a generational shift. Whereas the
protests in 2011-12 had a middle-aged core, the rallies on March 26th were
filled with people in their teens and 20s with few memories of their country
before Mr Putin. With their diverse class backgrounds, the Kremlin cannot
portray them as spoiled city hipsters or pitch them against blue-collar
workers, as it did with the protesters five years ago. Unlike the
30-somethings who took to the streets back then, these younger protesters
have little to lose.

  When the feeling's gone

  With the economy in trouble, the patriotic buzz of Mr Putin's
military exploits is fading. Denis Volkov of the Levada Centre, an
independent pollster, writes that for most Russians, the annexation of Crimea
"has lost its relevance". The Kremlin, which successfully
suppressed the protests five years ago, has fewer tools at its disposal.
Arresting or beating up teenage demonstrators would risk bringing their
parents onto the streets. And one of the Kremlin's chief ideological
weapons, the fear of returning to the chaos of the 1990s, is lost on a
generation that has no memory of it. Another favourite concept, Russia's
resurgence to great-power status, is also of limited use: most of the
protesters take it for granted.

  A group of anthropologists from the Russian Presidential Academy
who have studied attitudes among young people say they lack the fear of
authority instilled during the Soviet era, and are more attached than their
elders to universal values such as honesty and dignity. The Soviet coping
mechanisms of cynicism and double-think are notably absent among the young.
They see Russia's current elite as financially and morally corrupt, and
find Mr Navalny's simple slogan, "Don't lie and don't
steal", compelling.

  Television, the medium which Mr Putin's government uses to
manipulate mass opinion, has little effect on the young, who mainly get their
news from the internet. The power of the regime's use of television
relies on the majority of Russians choosing to be passive spectators of the
political narratives which the government creates for them. According to the
Levada Centre, most Russians believe that "nothing depends on us."
The younger generation appears to be different. "I need to exercise my
civil rights if I don't want to live my life complaining about the
country in which I was born," says a 20-year-old student in Moscow.
"It is wrong to say that 'nothing depends on us.' Of course it
does."

