Full Text: 
  The world has made amazing progress in eradicating extreme
poverty. The going will be much harder from now on

  TO PEOPLE who believe that the world used to be a better place,
and especially to those who argue that globalisation has done more economic
harm than good, there is a simple, powerful riposte: chart 1, below. In 1981
some 42% of the world's population were extremely poor, according to the
World Bank. They were not just poorer than a large majority of their
compatriots, as many rich countries define poverty among their own citizens
today, but absolutely destitute. At best, they had barely enough money to eat
and pay for necessities like clothes. At worst, they starved.

  Since then the number of people in absolute poverty has fallen by
about 1bn and the number of non-poor people has gone up by roughly 4bn. By
2013, the most recent year for which reliable data exist, just 10.7% of the
world's population was poor (the modern yardstick for destitution is
that a person consumes less than $1.90 a day at 2011 purchasing-power
parity). Poverty has almost certainly retreated further since 2013: the World
Bank's finger-in-the-wind estimate for 2016 is 9.1%. Homi Kharas of the
Brookings Institution, a think-tank, calculates that someone escapes extreme
poverty every 1.2 seconds.

  This is impressive and unprecedented. Economic historians reckon
that it took Britain about a century, from the 1820s to the 1920s, to cut
extreme poverty from more than 40% of its population to below 10%. Japan
started later, but moved faster. Beginning in the 1870s, the share of its
population who were absolutely poor fell from 80% to almost nothing in a
century. Today two large countries, China and Indonesia, are on course to
achieve Japanese levels of poverty reduction more than twice as fast as Japan
did.

  Unfortunately, this happy chapter in world history is drawing to a
close. The share of people living in absolute poverty will almost certainly
not decline as quickly in the future--and not because it will hit zero and
therefore have nowhere to fall. Even as the global proportion of poor people
continues to drift slowly downwards, large pockets of poverty will persist,
and some of them are likely to swell. The war on want is about to settle into
a period of grinding battles in the trenches.

  Until recently the world's poorest people could be divided
into three big groups: Chinese, Indian and everybody else. In 1987 China is
thought to have had 660m poor people, and India 374m. The concentration of
destitution in those two countries was in one sense a boon, because in both
places better economic policies allowed legions to scramble out of poverty.
At the last count (2011 in India; 2013 in China) India had 268m paupers and
China just 25m. Both countries are much more populous than they were 30 years
ago.

  Some of the decline in poverty in China and India is artificial,
caused by more accurate household surveys and new estimates of purchasing
power. But most of it is real. In both countries, economic growth has
benefited the poor as well as the rich, peasants as well as city-dwellers:
the magic ingredient in China's poverty-reduction formula since the
1980s has been not its factories but its highly productive small farms. Much
the same is true of other Asian countries. Carolina Sanchez, a manager at the
World Bank, is particularly impressed by Bangladesh, where many sparsely
educated women have been able to find good jobs in textile factories.

  These days about four-fifths of all extremely poor people live in
the countryside, and just over half of them live in sub-Saharan Africa (see
chart 2). Africa is as studded with examples of failure as Asia is filled
with success stories. Look at Nigeria, says Kaushik Basu, an economist at
Cornell University. In 1985 the share of Nigerians below the international
poverty line was estimated to be 45%--a lower proportion than in China or
Indonesia. Now Nigeria has a much higher share of poor people than either
country. The World Food Programme, an arm of the UN, is sending bags of grain
to the lawless, hungry north-east (see "Famine stalks Africa and Yemen:
The third horseman returns").

  Sub-Saharan Africa is not actually going backwards. Its absolute
poverty rate has fallen from 54% in 1990 to 41% in 2013. But because
Africa's population is growing so quickly--by about 2.5% a year,
compared with 1% for Asia--and because the poverty rate is declining only
slowly, the number of poor Africans is higher than it was in the 1990s. With
more destitute inhabitants than any other region, sub-Saharan Africa now
drives the global poverty rate.

  Working towards welfare

  That is bad news, because African poverty is particularly
intractable. The first problem is that economic growth has been weak,
considering the continent's swelling population. According to the IMF,
since 2000 GDP per head at purchasing-power parity has doubled in sub-Saharan
Africa; in emerging Asia it almost quadrupled. Oil-producing states such as
Angola and Nigeria have gone through booms that have done little to cut deep
poverty--and, anyway, have been followed by busts.

  A second problem is that many African governments are flimsy,
incompetent, authoritarian or rapacious. The OECD, a club of mostly rich
countries, counts 56 places in the world as "fragile"--mostly
countries, but including the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Fully 36 are in
Africa. The continent is not as ravaged by war as it was in the 1980s and
1990s, but it still has some disastrous countries, such as the Democratic
Republic of Congo and South Sudan, and a larger number that occasionally
lapse into political violence, such as Ivory Coast and Kenya. Violence both
creates poverty and distracts governments from the work of dealing with it.

  The third problem is that poor people in Africa are commonly very
poor indeed. Compare Rwanda with Bangladesh. Both are low-income countries;
both are reasonably competently governed; both have grown well in the past
few years. But Rwanda's poor are much poorer than Bangladesh's.
Many get by on around $1 a day (see chart 3). Suppose, says Laurence Chandy
of UNICEF, that Rwanda experiences 5% growth per head every year for ten
years and this growth is spread evenly. At the end of that impressive run, a
quarter of Rwandans would still be below the absolute poverty line.

  Rwanda is in a worse position than Bangladesh--except in one
sense. Because it has a large lump of people below the $1.90 poverty line,
Rwanda ought to be able to pull ever more people over the line for every
point of growth (assuming the growth is evenly spread). In Bangladesh the
opposite is true. It has a lump of people who are just clear of poverty and a
diminishing proportion just below the line who can easily be pulled over.
Bangladesh has made excellent progress against poverty so far. It will
probably make slower progress from now on.

  India is in a similar position to Bangladesh, points out Mr Basu,
who used to be the chief economic adviser to India's government. With
huge numbers of people who are barely out of poverty, it now needs to prevent
near-paupers from falling back, while also dragging the poorest out of
destitution faster than economic growth alone could do the job.

  In short, India and countries like it need proper welfare systems.
They are still some way from getting them. In general, government spending is
a smaller share of GDP in lower-middle-income countries than in poorer or
richer ones. South Asia is especially mean compared with Latin America. In
2014 India spent just 0.7% of its GDP on social safety-net programmes. Three
years earlier Brazil had spent 2.4% of its GDP on such programmes. And half
of India's spending went on rural public-works projects and feeding
children in schools. Brazil's payments were nearly all cash transfers,
which are more efficient. India has trimmed some spectacularly ill-targeted
handouts, such as fuel subsidies, and is musing about a universal basic
income, made possible by its biometric identity system, which now covers an
astounding 1.1bn people. But that is still talk.

  As extreme poverty disappears everywhere except in Africa and in
Asian countries with weak welfare systems, the campaign to eradicate it is
likely to slow down. The World Bank reckons that about 4% of the world's
population will still be poor in 2030 if economies continue to grow as
quickly as they have in the past ten years and poor people's incomes
grow at the same rate as everyone else's. The number of poor people
might even rise a little.

  The last-mile problem

  After decades of astonishing progress, a spell of sluggish
poverty-reduction would be a great disappointment. Among other things, it
would probably mean a prominent target being missed. In 2000 the members of
the UN agreed to try to cut poverty to half of the 1990 level by 2015.
Progress was so quick that the world got there at least five years early. So
two new targets have been set--the first of a long list of "sustainable
development goals". The world is now supposed to cut the absolute
poverty rate to 9% by 2020 and 3% by 2030. The first of these targets can and
probably will be hit. The second looks out of reach.

  Still, a global target for reducing absolute poverty seems
increasingly beside the point, because poverty is less and less global. In
the mid-19th century every continent had a large population of poor people.
Now, after absolute poverty has been virtually eradicated in one region after
another--Europe, North America, Latin America and now East Asia--it has
become a plague specific to South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. It seems
likely that poverty will become ever more African.

  It is possible to imagine a future in which the global poverty
rate continues to drop even as poverty becomes more entrenched in a few
unlucky countries, scarred by war and bad government. That would be a huge
improvement on the past, but hard to cheer. A broadly poverty-free world, but
with sad, durable exceptions, is not good enough.

