Full Text: 
  A brief history of how Manifest Destiny came to reside in the
Pacific

  FOR MOST OF its history, America has been isolationist. Those who
now worry about it turning away from its ideals of free trade and an
internationalist outlook may forget how recent they are, born out of cold-war
necessity. By contrast, America's much older sense of its own
exceptionalism was nurtured by turning consciously west, away from European
monarchy, class and conflict. It was a "westering" people to whom
the novus ordo seclorum imprinted on every dollar bill applied. They first
crossed the vast North American continent, and when they ran out of land,
Manifest Destiny took to the sea, unrolling an expanding American frontier
across the Pacific.

  The discovery of gold in California in 1848 changed everything.
Not only was the gold rush the first of California's many booms; it
shifted global perspectives, spurring Karl Marx to start work on "Das
Kapital" and rekindling hopes of long-distance commerce across the
Pacific. American traders set off by sea, accompanied by missionaries, guano
miners, planters and expeditionary forces. By the end of the 19th century the
theories of Alfred Thayer Mahan, a great naval strategist who argued for
decisive American sea power, had taken hold. Colonies, protectorates and
incorporated territories soon followed.

  Hawaii, with its superb port, Pearl Harbour, was the first Pacific
territory to come under American sway; the kingdom was eventually annexed in
1898. That same year American forces seized the Philippines as part of a
jingoistic war with Spain that had begun in Havana. After an easy victory
over the Spanish in Manila, the Americans found themselves fighting a
counter-insurgency against Filipinos seeking their own republic. The
president of the day, William McKinley, was at a loss to know what to do with
the new Philippine territories. But while praying for guidance one sleepless
night, it came to him that America's mission was to "uplift and
civilise and Christianise".

  McKinley had stumbled into empire with "no more backbone than
a chocolate eclair", as Theodore Roosevelt, a fan of muscular
imperialism, put it. The muscular school soon took charge. "Benevolent
assimilation" would supposedly raise Filipinos to a higher plane. The
generals in the Philippine campaign had nearly all earned their spurs
fighting native Americans. In the tropics they applied the same genocidal
techniques of terror, atrocities and native reservations. In three years of
fighting, between 200,000 and 700,000 men, women and children died as a
consequence of American brutality.

  After early victories, the campaign turned into quicksand (with
haunting echoes in Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq). In the southern
Philippines, American troops were fighting Muslim insurgents long after the
rest of the archipelago had been pacified--and American special forces are
still in Mindanao today.

  The American violence, and decades of condescending racism that
followed, go some way towards explaining a vein of anti-Americanism that
resurfaces from time to time in a country that also admires America. The two
emotions live in the same Philippine breast, says Malcolm Cook of the
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore. The ill-feeling was
evident in the early 1990s, when the senate voted to eject American forces
from Philippine bases; and, more recently, in President Rodrigo
Duterte's sudden pivot to China last year, and in his labelling of
President Barack Obama as a "son of a bitch".

  Most Americans are blithely unaware of the back story, viewing Mr
Duterte's behaviour as astonishing ingratitude towards an ally that,
until Philippine independence in 1946, had tried to pour its protege's
society into an American mould, and that had remained a close friend since.
But near-ignorance about the essentially imperialising mission that brought
America to the region in the first place hardly helps an understanding of its
position in Asia today. One lesson is that the case for a continued American
presence in Asia has to be constantly remade.

