Full Text: 
  A simple device can warn the wearer of noxious substances

  NERVE agents such as sarin and VX can kill quickly in low doses.
Kim Jong Nam, half brother of Kim Jong Il, North Korea's leader, was
recently murdered by having VX smeared on his face at Kuala Lumpur airport.
Though the use of nerve agents is supposed to be banned by treaty,
governments and terrorists have deployed them, and may do so again in the
future. At the moment, there is no simple way for soldiers in the field, or
inspectors looking for manufacturing and storage sites, to detect nerve
agents. The electrochemical sensors involved are bulky and awkward to use.

  On civvy street, meanwhile, similar chemicals are employed as
pesticides to ward off insects that might otherwise damage fruit and
vegetable crops. If such crops are not thoroughly washed after picking, or
have been overdosed in the first place, then they, too, may present a health
hazard. Yet inspecting them to see if they are contaminated can also be a
hassle.

  It would be better all round if people had suitable detection
technology available at their fingertips. And Joseph Wang of the University
of California, San Diego, reports in ACS Sensors that he has a system that
achieves this quite literally.

  Sarin, VX and their kind are chemicals called organophosphorus
compounds, which can be deactivated by an enzyme known as organophosphorus
hydrolase. Existing nerve-agent detectors record changes induced by the
presence of organophosphorus compounds in the electrical resistance of gels
impregnated with this enzyme. Dr Wang's trick is to miniaturise the
process so that it fits on a glove.

  To make their device, he and his colleagues print electrodes made
of silver and silver chloride, and of carbon, onto the index fingers of
rubber gloves. These electrodes run from the knuckle to the fingertip, where
they almost, but not quite, meet. The zone of near-meeting is coated with a
layer of gel containing organophosphorus hydrolase. The gel connects the ends
of the electrodes together, completing the circuit. The knuckle-ends of the
electrodes, meanwhile, are designed to meet a special ring, worn over the
glove, that both supplies them with current and transmits information on the
strength of that current to a nearby mobile phone--setting off an alarm if
the current varies in a way that indicates the enzyme is reacting with a
nerve agent.

  To gather a residue sample from a surface, the glove's thumb
has a carbon disc printed onto it which the wearer rubs across a suspicious
area. All he has to do then is press index finger and thumb together and, if
the alarm goes off, he knows the surface in question is contaminated.

  Tests with organophosphorus compounds smeared on glass, wood,
stainless steel and plastic, and also four types of fruit and vegetable,
suggest the idea works in principle. If it works in the field (and if
suitable alternative enzymes can be found), it might be extended to the
detection of other chemicals of interest, such as gunshot residues, drugs and
explosives.

