Full Text: 
  Not quite what Madison had in mind

  Not quite what Madison had in mind

  Not quite what Madison had in mind

  THE morning after Donald Trump was elected president, Eric
Schneiderman, the Democratic attorney-general of New York, summoned his
raddled senior lawyers to a war council. Seated in his unfussy 25th-floor
office in lower Manhattan, Mr Schneiderman told them to assume Mr
Trump's brutish campaign pledges were in earnest, and to clear their
desks for action.

  While the president-elect was digesting his victory in Trump
Tower, five miles up the road, Mr Schneiderman put scores of the 650 lawyers
at his disposal on Trump watch. They started trawling through his campaign
statements and preparing legal defences against the assaults he had promised
on immigration, consumer protection and climate-change policy. With the
Republicans who control Congress apparently unwilling to hold Mr Trump to
account, Mr Schneiderman feared that Democratic attorneys-general might have
to act as a thin blue line of resistance to an authoritarian president.

  Mr Schneiderman, a small man who speaks fast and wastes few words,
already understood Mr Trump's capacity for rule-breaking. In 2013 he
sued Mr Trump over the fleecing of students at Trump University, a bogus
training scheme for would-be property moguls. In response, the tycoon alleged
malicious prosecution and sued him for millions of dollars. In 2014 the New
York Observer, a newspaper owned by Mr Trump's son-in-law and adviser,
Jared Kushner, ran a lengthy hatchet job on him. "I did not realise it
at the time," he says, "but I was getting a preview of the scorched
earth approach he takes to opposition."

  Ten weeks into his term, Mr Trump is behaving much as Mr
Schneiderman predicted. Among other affronts, he has tried to discredit the
electoral process by making false claims about illegal voting and has peddled
false allegations that Britain spied on him. He has failed to disengage
convincingly from his business interests, or reveal the extent of them. He
has signed cruel and amateurish immigration rules and, when they faced legal
challenge, argued that his border policy was no business of the courts.
According to the fact-checkers at the Washington Post, Mr Trump uttered 317
"false or misleading" statements in his first 63 days as president.
"It's been clear since he took office", says Mr Schneiderman,
who joined the attack on the immigration rules, "that this president has
less regard for the rule of law and precedent and traditions than anyone in
recent memory."

  Yet although Mr Schneiderman's estimation of the threat Mr
Trump poses appears well judged, his sense of America's vulnerability
now looks pessimistic. The failure of the Republicans in the House of
Representatives on March 24th to pass a health-care bill on which Mr Trump
had staked his image as America's closer-in-chief shows that the
president cannot carry all before him. A vigorous repulse to his excesses
from journalists, NGOs, companies and millions of protesters, as well as the
states, has proved additionally inconvenient. America's constitutional
checks and balances appear to be holding up better than many feared.

  The defeat of the American Health Care Act (AHCA), it must be
admitted, was hardly a textbook illustration of James Madison's
constitutional ideal that presidential ambition be frustrated by the powers
of Congress. The bill's aspiration, to begin the process of repealing
Barack Obama's health-care reform, known as Obamacare, is widely shared
among Republicans. Under Mr Obama, House Republicans futilely voted to repeal
Obamacare more than 50 times. Getting rid of it was one of Mr Trump's
main campaign pledges. The 30-odd right-wingers, known as the House Freedom
Caucus, who opposed the repeal bill, causing Paul Ryan, the Republican
Speaker of the House, to withdraw it, intended no rebuke to Mr Trump. Many
caucus members admire him. Their target was Mr Ryan, whose pragmatism they
abhor: they felt his bill, which they derided as "Obamacare-lite",
would not sufficiently reduce federal subsidies which help the poor buy
health insurance.

  Regardless of their target, they dealt a blow to Mr Trump. He has
promised to end the legislative dysfunction in Washington, DC, with his
dealmaking skills. In the case of the AHCA, these consisted in threatening to
launch primary challenges against his fellow Republicans unless they passed a
bill which he appeared not to understand very well ("Mark Meadows,
I'm coming after you," he told the caucus's North Carolinian
leader, maybe jokingly). Perhaps he will recover some of his lost face, as
Bill Clinton did after suffering his own health-care reform foul-up early in
his presidency. But Mr Trump will have to acquire better negotiating skills.
He could also do with lifting his approval ratings; according to polling by
Gallup, only 35% of Americans think he is doing a good job, which is unlikely
to strike fear into Mr Meadows.

  The debacle has forced Mr Trump to consider wooing Democratic
congressmen (there is talk of him linking his tax reform plans, of which
Democrats are sceptical, to his infrastructure plans, which they like), which
would require him to moderate his behaviour. Some Republican senators, who
have longer terms and more mixed electorates than their colleagues in the
House, are already demanding he do so. Though the AHCA defeat did not in
itself augur better congressional oversight of Mr Trump, the spectre that
haunted Mr Schneiderman--a unified Republican government uncritically
supporting a rogue president--is looking less threatening.

  Lawsuits, satire and social media

  The courts have provided a more straightforward check. Mr
Trump's immigration rules appeared to be an attempt to honour his
campaign promise to keep out Muslims; they were disguised as
counter-terrorism measures against high-risk nationalities in an effort to
evade the constitutional bar on discriminating on the basis of religion. Both
edicts were challenged by broad coalitions of states, NGOs and private firms
and subsequently stayed by judges on procedural and constitutional grounds.
The president impugned the legitimacy of the first obstructive beak, James
Robart--a George W. Bush appointee whom Mr Trump described as a
"so-called judge". Even his own nominee to the Supreme Court, Neil
Gorsuch, a Coloradan jurist, thought this too much. "When anyone
criticises the honesty, the integrity or the motives of a federal judge, I
find that disheartening," he said during his Senate confirmation hearing
on March 21st.

  The media, leaky bureaucrats and the millions who have flocked to
rallies against his presidency (which, though dwindling, are still
widespread) have provided such a barrage of extra-constitutional scrutiny
that some think a new system of accountability is emerging. "We're
seeing a vastly expanded definition of checks and balances, and they seem to
be working," says Alan Dershowitz, a legal scholar.

  In a world worried about the rise of fake news, the best coverage
of Mr Trump's administration has been tremendous. The New York Times and
Washington Post have had weekly scoops about the peculiar chumminess between
its senior members and various Russians; the scandal has so far forced
Michael Flynn to quit as national security adviser and Jeff Sessions, the
attorney-general, to recuse himself from his department's investigation
into allegations that Mr Trump's team colluded with Russian hackers
during the campaign. Those revelations have also made it harder for
Republican congressmen to ignore the issue, as some, including Devin Nunes,
who heads the House intelligence committee, would clearly prefer (see
"Trump and Russia: Never-ending story").

  Honed by decades of growing partisanship and low expectations of
congressional oversight, the response to Mr Trump from NGOs, left-leaning and
otherwise, has been similarly impressive. The American Civil Liberties Union,
which sued the administration over both sets of immigration rules, received
over $24m in online donations over the course of a recent weekend, more than
six times what it normally expects to collect online in a year. For some,
this is a continuation of previous struggles; to brief reporters on its plans
to resist Mr Trump one environmental group dusts off a history of its
(broadly successful) legal stand-offs with Mr Bush.

  Mr Dershowitz also points to less organised checks, including
critical commentary on social media, disapproving foreign allies and
merciless late-night comics: Mr Trump has perked up American satire and the
career of Alec Baldwin (pictured). "It's a more transient, not
predictable or reliable, not visible or transparent system, which has its own
dangers," he says. "But in my view it will be strong enough to be a
sufficient check on this presidency."

  It is a sad reflection of the state of America that a
quasi-constitutional role for "Saturday Night Live" could seem
reassuring. The system that the founders created as a way for the different
branches of government to counter each other's excesses should not need
shoring up by a posse of bloggers and disloyal civil servants. The
constitutional frailty this reveals, and of which Mr Trump's election is
to some degree symptomatic, has in fact been evident for some time.

  It is over four decades since the historian Arthur Schlesinger
warned, in "The Imperial Presidency", of a post-war power grab by
the executive branch "so spacious and peremptory as to imply a radical
transformation of the traditional polity." The book was a hit, but did
nothing to interrupt a steady flow of powers to the White House which has
continued under all the presidents since. As the executive opened up new
domains for itself in setting pollution standards for industry, overseeing
banking and even ordering the country to war, a clear congressional
prerogative, the presidential bureaucracy ballooned.

  As it grew, it became increasingly politicised; under John F.
Kennedy, 196 presidential appointments required Senate confirmation, now
1,212 do. And it became more centralised. In the 1930s Congress magnanimously
permitted Franklin D. Roosevelt to maintain a staff of six "presidential
assistants"; recent presidents have commanded an army of over 500 White
House staffers, whose mission is to ensure the government bends to the
president's will, and that he gets all the credit when it does. This has
transformed the character of government, from a semblance of well-advised
policymaking to a relentless effort to fulfil presidential campaign promises.

  A space for authoritarianism

  At the expense of Congress, recent presidents have also assumed
additional powers over foreign policy and civil liberties. In doing so they
risk being checked by judges. But they have mitigated that possibility by
assembling, in the office of the White House counsel, a battery of ingenious,
Supreme Court-quality lawyers; Mr Obama employed almost 50. The result has
been a proliferation of contentious legal precedents, extending the authority
of the president, which in unscrupulous hands could amount to a toolkit for
tyranny. Following Mr Bush's and Mr Obama's example, the president
can order American citizens to be killed secretly overseas, detain foreign
prisoners indefinitely without charge and try them on the basis of evidence
that the state will not divulge.

  Despite spasms of concern, both liberals and conservatives have
applauded this executive power grab. "I want to strengthen the current
Democratic president," said Newt Gingrich, when he was a bitterly
partisan Republican Speaker of the House under Mr Clinton, "because he
is the president." Scholars of both stripes have often argued that the
risks of overreach were justified by the president's democratic
prerogative to fulfil his mandate. The growing dysfunction in Congress, which
has seen its lawmaking and oversight give way to shouty tribalism (for which
Mr Gingrich deserves much blame) has meanwhile made that conclusion seem more
natural. For if Congress will not pass laws, how else is the country to be
governed?

  These constitutional evils reinforce each other. Congress, a body
the Founding Fathers considered so dangerous that it needed splitting in two,
is in its demoralised state especially susceptible to unthinking party
allegiance. This has in turn worn away many of the democratic norms upon
which the checks and balances depend. Despairing of Senate Republicans'
use of the filibuster to block Mr Obama's appointees, for example, the
Democrats scrapped the measure in 2013, except in the case of Supreme Court
appointments. Now the Democrats are in the minority, vowing to block Mr
Gorsuch, and the Republicans are likely to remove that last defence of
scrutiny by the minority party in federal appointments.

  At the same time, a combination of vengeful partisanship,
internet-based alternative realities and the primary system of nominating
candidates, which promotes hardliners, is tilting American politics towards
extremism. Put this together with the growth of executive power and the
fraying of constitutional checks on it and the risks of something going
seriously wrong in the White House are obvious. In 2010 Bruce Ackerman, a
Yale legal scholar, predicted it was only a matter of time before America
elected a "charismatic president to politicise the bureaucracy and run
roughshod over the rule of law".

  In this wider context, the constraints on Mr Trump look less
reassuring. His presidency becomes a predicted step in a process of
democratic decline which his unscrupulous leadership is likely to accelerate.
To arrest that decline would take substantial reform, with new checks on the
executive, a reinvigorated Congress and political parties freed from the
thrall of hardliners--all unimaginable today. So it is appropriate to ponder
how much damage Mr Trump could do, even if he remains constrained by the
forces Mr Dershowitz and others find comforting.

  Most of his recent frustrations have been self-inflicted, which is
in a way reassuring. Though Mr Trump is sometimes compared to the White
House's last big rule breaker, Richard Nixon, he appears much less
competent. Nixon was a skilful, hardworking criminal; Mr Trump is a blowhard
who even now seems unaware of the magnitude and complexity of the office he
holds. Still, he and his advisers will get better at using the presidential
toolkit, including its legal precedents and firepower. In the event of a
threat to national security, for example, Mr Trump's appetite for power
and desire to be vindicated over his Islamophobic rhetoric could produce dire
results.

  Oh, for the days of the snuffbox

  The Trump team already has plans to bring the presidential
bureaucracy to heel. "The administrative state isn't going to
administer itself," says a senior White House official. One plan, he
suggests, is to send "tiger teams into the beast, to ask, 'How have
you implemented the wishes and policies of the president?'"
Leakers, beware.

  How successful such tactics are may depend largely on Mr
Trump's political fortunes--which could be much better than many of his
opponents assume. Even if his ratings remain low, the realities of a
polarised electorate and a favourable electoral map mean that the Republicans
may well retain both congressional houses in next year's mid-term
elections. Mr Trump will also have the chance to nominate over a 100 federal
judges, perhaps including a second Supreme Court justice. Both developments
could strengthen him considerably. If an FBI investigation into the Russia
connection turned up something serious, a Republican congress would still be
loth to impeach Mr Trump.

  Mr Trump's contribution to the decay of democratic norms
already appears vast. Each time he badmouths an institution or makes false
claims about a predecessor, opponent or peer, America's democratic
framework takes a hit. Some of the damage may be permanent. A show of decency
once mattered in American politics; then 63m Americans voted to elect as
president a man they had heard boasting of his ability to assault women. It
was also recently accepted that a sitting president must publish his tax
returns and disengage from his business interests. Mr Trump, who has done
neither, does not appear to have any problem with the profits flowing from
his presidency.

  As the Washington Post has reported, he has spent almost a third
of his time as president at a Trump-branded property, including his
Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida, where club members have been treated to the
sight of the president urgently discussing North Korean missile launches over
salad. Because another of his presidential haunts, the Trump International
hotel, a short walk along Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House, is also
popular with foreign dignitaries, Mr Trump has been sued over an obscure
clause of the constitution that forbids public servants from accepting fees
or gifts from a foreign state. Some legal scholars have, rather valiantly,
cited as precedent Benjamin Franklin's seeking Congress's approval
before accepting a jewel-encrusted snuffbox from the king of France as a
retirement gift. The distance and obscurity of the precedent illustrates the
main difficulty of using the law to restrain the president's behaviour.
No one has ever seen anything like it.

  Perhaps Mr Trump will be adequately constrained nonetheless. The
reassuringly trenchant responses to his excesses from the judiciary, states,
bureaucracy and NGOs suggest a democracy more vital than some fear. It might
even one day seem ridiculous that a figure as unserious as Mr Trump could
have seemed so threatening. But even in that best case, it will take
something more to restore America's democratic system to a more
foolproof state. It will require more than million-man marches or steadfast
judges, a degree of national consensus on the way forward--which is the very
thing that America most conspicuously lacks.

