Full Text: 
  Investors are realising Mr Trump's promises may not be
fulfilled

  HONEYMOONS don't last for ever. Having been a reluctant bride
to President Donald Trump when courted in the run-up to November's
election, the American stockmarket quickly melted into a mood of romantic
euphoria. Shares rose by 12% between election day and March 1st (see chart).
But in recent days, sentiment has dimmed. There is talk of the
"Trump-disappointment trade".

  For the markets to experience some kind of sell-off is hardly a
surprise. The S&P 500 index had gone more than 100 days without a 1%
decline, the longest such streak since 1995. And the setback should not be
exaggerated. The S&P 500 remains well above its pre-election level,
compared with the dollar, which has given up around half its gains. The
ten-year Treasury-bond yield, which hit 2.62% on March 13th, has dropped back
to 2.38%.

  The immediate cause of the retreat seemed to be the failure of Mr
Trump to repeal his predecessor's health-care bill. That logic was
hardly a great advertisement for capitalism, implying that the fewer
Americans had access to health insurance, the happier investors would be. But
the broader rationale seemed to be that, if the Republicans could not meet
this campaign promise, then they also would struggle to push through the tax
cuts which investors were counting on to push up corporate profits and
improve economic growth. A basket of shares of firms that pay the highest tax
rates as a proportion of profits, compiled by Goldman Sachs, an investment
bank, is now lower than it was before the election.

  On its own this change of mood made investors look naive. Mr Trump
came to office as a political neophyte with a reputation for being sketchy on
policy detail. His differences with the congressional Republican Party were
made clear throughout the campaign. No one should have expected a smooth
roll-out of policy. Nor is a lower corporate-tax rate a sure route to growth.
Britain has cut its marginal rate from 28% to 20% since 2010, without
sparking a runaway boom.

  In any case, given the lengthy negotiations needed to create a tax
package, and the inevitable lag before the policy has an effect on the
economy, it would probably be 2018 before the impact of a fiscal stimulus
became clear. And if any pickup in growth is delayed, then the Federal
Reserve may have less need to push interest rates up as rapidly, weakening
the appeal of the dollar for international investors. The latest forecast
from the tracking model of the Atlanta Fed suggests that first-quarter growth
in America may have been only an annualised 1%.

  With analysts forecasting 12% growth in S&P 500
companies' profits this year, in other words, there was scope for
disappointment for the stockmarket. That was especially so since American
shares are trading on a cyclically adjusted price-earnings ratio of 29, a
level exceeded only in the booms of the late 1920s and 1990s.

  Globally, however, stockmarkets are not dependent on Mr Trump to
push through his agenda. Their mood started to brighten last spring as
concerns about "secular stagnation" and a hard landing for the
Chinese economy began to dissipate. By the end of 2016 Asian exports were
picking up, commodity prices were rebounding and growth forecasts for 2017
were being revised higher.

  So investors started the year in optimistic mood. A recent survey
of fund managers by Absolute Strategy, a research firm, found that 74% expect
global equities to produce better returns than government bonds over the next
12 months and 70% expect global profits to rise.

  Recent positive data have included the German Ifo survey of
business confidence, which was its strongest since 2011; a rebound in
euro-zone consumer confidence; and Chinese industrial profits, which were
31.5% higher in January and February than in the same period a year ago.
Emerging markets have risen much faster than the S&P 500 this year,
gaining 12%, and trade on an historic price-earnings ratio of less than 14,
according to Societe Generale, a French bank.

  So the markets might have been doing very well even if the
presidential election had produced a different outcome. Indeed, the Trump
agenda could well be more of a threat than a promise for international
investors, particularly if the administration pursues a more protectionist
line or makes a blunder in its approach to flashpoints with China, Iran or
North Korea. Markets turned round so dramatically on the morning after Mr
Trump's election that investors may yet have cause to remember the old
saying: "Marry in haste; repent at leisure."

  Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood

