Full Text: 
  An election gives Theresa May the hope of a far larger majority.
It also offers the chance of a better Brexit

  FOR an event that was supposed to settle a big political question
once and for all, last year's referendum on Britain's membership of
the European Union has proved spectacularly disruptive. First it did for the
government of David Cameron, who had called it expecting a win for Remain.
Then it provoked renewed calls for separation in Scotland and Northern
Ireland, which opposed Brexit. Now Theresa May, who entered Downing Street
only last summer, has called a snap general election for June 8th, having
previously insisted that such a course would cause further
"instability". Britons are facing their third national poll in two
years.

  Mrs May says the election is necessary to protect the Brexit
process from mischievous opposition parties that plan to derail it. That is
nonsense: although most MPs, including her own, campaigned to Remain, they
have dutifully upheld the referendum result in Parliament. Surely more
important in the prime minister's calculation are the opinion polls that
show her Conservative Party more than 20 percentage points ahead of the
Labour opposition, which is hamstrung by its ineffectual leader, Jeremy
Corbyn (see "The opposition: Hard work for Labour"). Elections are
inherently hard to predict--this one could be treated by voters as a poll
about everything from the railways to the National Health Service. But, with
Mr Corbyn clinging on and the economy yet to feel the smack of Brexit, Mrs
May has a chance to increase her working majority of 17 to perhaps more than
100.

  For the 48% of voters who, like this newspaper, opposed Brexit,
this may look ominous. Mrs May is aiming for a "hard" exit,
needlessly taking Britain out of the EU's single market so she can clamp
down on immigration, which would do more harm still. The election looks
likely to strengthen her hand. In fact, it offers an opportunity for those
who believe in a more open, liberal Britain. A bigger majority would leave
Mrs May freer to strike sensible compromises with the EU. And the election
provides a chance to give liberals of all political stripes a louder voice in
the debate that will dominate the next few years. The outcome could be a less
damaging Brexit.

  June, the making of May

  From a prime minister who has made several U-turns in her nine
months in power, this one was dramatic. Only last month her official
spokesman insisted: "There is not going to be a general election."
But it is a reversal that might mean fewer U-turns in future. Mrs May will
draw up her own manifesto, rather than being half-bound by the promises of
her predecessor, which forced her into the embarrassing withdrawal of part of
last month's budget. If the polls are correct, she will have enough MPs
to push through unpopular but necessary solutions to problems such as the
housing shortage and the funding crisis in social care, which she has so far
approached only timidly. With a proper mandate and some clout in Parliament,
the prime minister would have the chance to shake off the "Theresa
Maybe" nickname that we gave her earlier this year.

  Nowhere does that matter more than with Brexit. Having triggered
Article 50 last month, Britain and the rest of the EU have two years to
negotiate a deal. Almost nobody thinks that offers enough time. After March
2019, unless both sides agree on some sort of transition, Britain will crash
ruinously out of the union. Until a new regime is sorted out over a number of
years, Britain will be able to sell into its most important market only under
World Trade Organisation rules.

  The election makes this less likely. Although Mrs May has
sometimes threatened to leave without any agreement, saying "no deal is
better than a bad deal", she has lately accepted the need for a
transition arrangement after Brexit. With a larger majority she can more
easily stand up to her ultra-Eurosceptic backbenchers, some of whom seem
actively to want Britain to crash out. That explains why the pound rose this
week.

  The election also buys Mrs May time. Holding a vote this year
means that she need not face the polls again until 2022, three years after
Britain's formal exit from the EU. Avoiding the pressure of an imminent
contest at home will further strengthen her against the headbanging fringe of
her own party and the right-wing press, which screams treachery at any hint
of the compromises needed to secure a deal with the EU.

  Maybe not

  Just what use Mrs May makes of that freedom depends upon her own
preferences for Brexit--which are still not entirely clear even if she sounds
tough. Her record is neither rabidly pro (in the referendum she was a
reluctant Remainer) nor instinctively against (see "Bagehot: Theresa
May, Tory of Tories"). Crucially, though, to the extent that the hard
Brexiteers are pushed to the margins, other voices will be able to enter the
debate.

  In Parliament the election will end the odd situation in which MPs
have been bound both by the wishes of their constituents in the previous
election and also by the referendum. The next parliament's MPs will have
a mandate to stand up for whatever they advocate on the stump, be it hard
Brexit, soft Brexit or complete Breversal.

  The Liberal Democrats, reduced to just eight seats at the last
election, are the most pro-EU force in British politics. Their
resurgence--and the likely collapse of the vote for the pro-Brexit UK
Independence Party--would increase the ranks of Remainers in Parliament, and
encourage the Conservatives to choose Eurosensible candidates in marginal
seats. Last year Zac Goldsmith, a prominent Tory Leaver, was ejected by the
Lib Dems in a by-election. Tories fighting seats in Remain-voting areas such
as London and the university towns may have to soften their line on Brexit if
they are to avoid a similar fate.

  The debate outside Parliament will matter more, too. Since the
referendum those advocating a soft Brexit have been shouted down as
anti-democratic. All that changes with the news of an election. Businesses,
lobby groups and, of course, private citizens have a chance to make the case
for a soft Brexit both during the campaign and after it, during the long
months of negotiation to follow. The battle over Brexit was fought last
summer. The battle to define what form it should take is far from over.

