Full Text: 
  They stopped the tanks rolling

  The legacy of a failed attempt to topple the government

  AFTER months in hospital and several operations, Sabri Unal is
beginning to regain the use of his right arm. On July 15th last year, alarmed
by reports of an army coup, Mr Unal was injured in a forlorn attempt to block
a pair of tanks roaring down an Istanbul avenue. When the first tank showed
no signs of stopping, he dived between its tracks, avoiding death by a split
second. When another approached moments later, he threw himself to the ground
once again. That tank's tracks mangled his arm. Asked what inspired him
to take to the streets that night Mr Unal, a web programmer, offers a
straightforward answer. "As long as I can remember," he says,
"I have been against coups everywhere."

  The shock of the coup, the bloodiest in Turkey's history, and
the courage of thousands of people like Mr Unal who risked their lives to
oppose it, has been overshadowed in the world beyond Turkey's borders by
the mass purges, detentions and reports of torture that followed it. In
Turkey, it has been different. To legitimise President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan's draconian policies and to boost his attempt to bolster his
powers through a new constitution, the memory and trauma of the coup have
been nourished, politicised and consecrated.

  In Mr Erdogan's hands, the coup has turned into the
cornerstone of what the president and his supporters refer to as the
"New Turkey": a more religious, more anti-Western and less
predictable incarnation of the republic founded by Kemal Ataturk over nine
decades ago. Universities, parks, stadiums, swimming pools and other
landmarks across the country, including the Bosporus bridge where soldiers
fired on unarmed protesters, have been renamed after the coup and its
victims.

  On the streets of most cities, billboards proclaiming that Turks
will never succumb to putschists or terrorists mingle with banners calling
for a Yes vote in the constitutional referendum. At the start of the school
year, children across the country were made to watch a video that moved
seamlessly between footage of the coup and images of Ottoman troops squaring
off against Allied forces during the first world war. The education ministry
has added a class on the events of July 15th 2016 to the curriculum.

  Mr Erdogan compares the coup to Turkey's war of independence.
His aides reach for even more creative historical parallels. July 15th was a
"revolution" that will shape Turkey "just as much as 1789
influenced France and just as the Bolshevik revolution influenced
Russia", says Mehmet Ucum, a presidential adviser. The coup exposed and
brought down the "antidemocratic structure" within the bureaucracy,
Mr Ucum claims. The new constitution will help fill the vacuum, he insists.
"We have to rebuild the state from the ground up."

