Full Text: 
  Major Adrian Coles, champion of Britain's hedgehogs, died on
March 23rd, aged 86

  "FROM Clee to heaven the beacon burns," runs the opening
line of A.E. Housman's "A Shropshire Lad". The Clee hills,
rising to 1,700 feet, are the highest points in the county. From there,
across green slopes scoured and scattered with ruins of old quarry buildings,
the view south opens over the valley of the Teme to the blue hills of
Herefordshire and Worcestershire.

  To the slopes clings Clee Hill village which, until it closed, had
Shropshire's highest pub (called "The Kremlin" because, via
the radar aerials on the hill, its juke box could pick up Radio Moscow). The
sole hostelry is now the Golden Cross, where the regular beer is Hobsons
Twisted Spire and visitors can play, on ancient battered equipment, quoits
and pitch-penny. A bakery and post office stand along the main A 4117, which
is not very main here. In fact, because it crosses common land, at two points
it is spanned by a cattle grid.

  Several other cattle grids lie around Clee Hill, and it was one of
those that led Adrian Coles to hedgehogs. At the time, indeed for 40 years,
he was the local county councillor. The job mostly involved meetings about
schools, social services, flytipping and the like; as well as keeping an eye
on village greens, commons and roads. Its high point came when, as
"Father of the Council", he sat beside the queen at lunch and
proposed the loyal toast. Its turning point came in 1982, when his small
daughter ran in to tell him that a hedgehog was stuck under the cattle grid
at the end of the drive. ("I didn't choose hedgehogs," he said
later; "I had hedgehogs thrust upon me.") With cautious sticks and
an egg-pan he got it out, his first close encounter; and realised he had
stumbled on a general problem. There were probably hedgehogs stuck under
cattle grids all over Britain.

  His solution was to build a little corner ramp, made of concrete
or wood and at an angle of 20[degrees], up which a hedgehog could scramble.
He then persuaded the council (he was in the right job) to install them in
county grids. They are now compulsory on public roads across the country.

  Major Coles found himself getting exercised about hedgehogs. Their
numbers were falling so fast that they were almost on the edge of extinction.
Pesticides poisoned them, and cars squashed them. (Most Britons have seen
only that two-dimensional sort.) The fencing and paving of suburban gardens
stopped them foraging for food. And yet they were such good chaps, useful
creatures, eating the slugs and woodlice no gardener wanted. Their
doughtiness, as they rolled up into a ball to face their enemies, was
something he, as a career army officer, could only admire. He held nothing
against them, except the actual difficulty of picking them up.

  He had tapped into a national affection which was already there.
If Britain had a favourite wild animal, it was probably not the fox, gallant
but verminous, or the hare, magical but moonstruck, but the bright-eyed
pointy-nosed hedgehog, suddenly appearing on lawns at dusk like the head of
an old brush. The creature had been immortalised by Beatrix Potter in her
tale of Mrs Tiggy-Winkle, the tiny laundress who stole (but only to wash and
starch them till they shone) the handkerchiefs of little girls.

  Hot-water bottle and box

  As Major Coles warmed to the task his garden was invaded, soon
containing more hedgehogs per acre than any other spot in Britain. His next
step was to found a society, for which he also designed a tie. It grew fast.
When at 85 he retired from running it, the British Hedgehog Preservation
Society had more than 11,000 members. These included 700 "carers"
who would provide an injured hedgehog with a hot-water bottle and a warm box,
or put the small pink feet in splints. Major Coles talked regularly on the
BBC, advised vets and lobbied Parliament. During droughts he would send a
general letter to newspapers, urging people to put out water and cat food.

  He fought other successful campaigns, including getting household
appliances sold with sealed plugs, and worked hard for many charities; but
for this one he was famous. Letters would arrive from abroad addressed to
"Major Hedgehog, England". A grand moment came in 2014, when an
exhibit called "Hedgehog Street" won a gold medal at the Royal
Horticultural Society's show at Hampton Court. It displayed three
suburban gardens laid out as he recommended, with lush vegetation and
five-inch-square gaps in their fences, for hedgehogs to get through. Major
Coles, now widowed and living at the Royal Hospital Chelsea, presided in his
scarlet pensioner's coat with his service medals, and with a camera-shy
hedgehog in his lap.

  Lower-key, but just as satisfactory, was the celebration at the
Golden Cross in Clee Hill in 2012 to mark the BHPS's 30th anniversary.
The pub had renamed itself "The Cross Hedgehog" for the occasion.
Hobsons had brewed a new ale, "Old Prickly", and the village bakery
supplied spiky loaves of bread. The head of the BHPS had to admit that
numbers were still falling, by 25% in the past decade. But the rate of
decline had slowed; a network was now in place to help, and the
hedgehog's place in British hearts and minds seemed assured. With that
cheering thought, many a glass of Old Prickly was raised to Major Coles, and
to the movement he had started with his egg-pan and his sticks.

