Full Text: 
  Carmakers will need to get bigger to compete for the future of
mobility

  CARS are getting bigger. Motorists worldwide have for years been
abandoning four-door saloons in favour of bulkier SUVs. Carmakers have become
bigger, too. Four car firms now make around 10m vehicles a year in order to
reap economies of scale, particularly in the mass-market bit of the business
where profit margins can be painfully thin.

  Many executives also believe that size is the only protection
against the technological upheaval sweeping the industry. But bulking up fast
is easier said than done. Lots of different constituents have to be won over.
And most car bosses are still reticent about taking the plunge on mergers
because many have been catastrophes. Daimler's acquisition of Chrysler
in 1998, for example, was a notable disaster. The list of past crashes is
lengthy. Indeed, one recent deal--General Motors' sale of Opel, its
European arm, to France's PSA Group for [euro]1.3bn ($1.4bn)--seems to
go directly against the imperative to bulk up.

  In fact, that deal has had the effect of spurring more talk of
consolidation. Speculation centred at first on a possible mega-merger between
GM and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA), itself the result of a deal in 2014
(FCA's chairman, John Elkann, sits on the board of The Economist's
parent company). The Italian-owned firm, which makes just under 5m vehicles a
year, is run by Sergio Marchionne, who has been eyeing a merger with GM for
years. With the American firm now discarding a loss-making European business,
the theory goes, it could replace it with a profitable one--Fiat--and crunch
together the two firms' successful operations in America.

  Mary Barra, GM's boss, has repeatedly rejected Mr
Marchionne's overtures; selling Opel is unlikely to have changed her
mind. Some observers unkindly suggest that GM is in any case unable to handle
three tasks at once, and that its aim in ridding itself of Opel was to
concentrate on improving its operations in America and in China. Moreover, a
lot of the synergies from a deal depended on combining Fiat and Opel in
Europe.

  The rumour mill has since moved to Volkswagen. The German firm has
long cast a covetous eye over bits of FCA. At an annual industry shindig in
Geneva in March that coincided with the final sale of Opel, Mr Marchionne
said he had "no doubt that at the relevant time Volkswagen may show up
and have a chat". He also suggested that PSA Group's acquisition of
the GM unit, which puts the French firm in second place in Europe, adds to
the pressure on VW, the market leader, to bulk up further. VW's campaign
to conquer America, where its diesel-emissions scandal has undermined its
weak position, would be strengthened with FCA in tow. FCA's Ram trucks
are hugely profitable in America and the Jeep brand is resurgent worldwide.
The unrealised potential of Maserati and Alfa Romeo, alluring bywords for
Italian style, is also attractive.

  A deal would, however, bring little benefit in Europe, where VW
already has a big slice of the market and plenty of small cars on offer. With
Seat, a Spanish division, struggling and its own brand said to be loss-making
in the region, VW could well do without the trouble of integrating Fiat. FCA
is also the only big car company that is lumbered with lots of debt (of just
under [euro]5bn), making it a less tempting target.

  Matthias Muller, VW's chief executive, has not ruled out
talks with FCA, and has indicated that the German group is more open to a
merger than it used to be. But FCA is not the only option. An acquisition of
Ford (which just suffered the humiliation of being overtaken in market
capitalisation by Tesla, an electric-car firm founded in 2003) might also fit
VW's plans. Still, if VW is intent on leading the next round of industry
consolidation, it will need to put "dieselgate" behind it. Though
the German firm has paid $22bn in fines and compensation, the issue of who
knew what and when is still unresolved.

  Whatever combination of firms might bring it about, the goal of
creating a group that produces nearly 15m vehicles a year makes sense. Mr
Marchionne's oft-stated view is that the industry's duplicated
investment in kit such as near-identical engines and gear boxes is a waste of
resources, and that much of the money would be better returned to
shareholders. Other car bosses reckon the money should go on the technologies
that will transform the industry: mobility services such as ride-sharing,
electrification of the drivetrain and autonomous vehicles. Scale would allow
car firms to spread the cost over more vehicles.

  One argument against full-scale mergers has been that loose
alliances, such as that between Renault, a French car manufacturer, and
Japan's Nissan, can do the job by helping to pool development costs. The
Renault-Nissan alliance has succeeded. After taking a controlling stake in
Mitsubishi, a smaller Japanese carmaker, last year, the firm makes nearly 10m
cars a year.

  An alliance works well for components and for individual
platforms, the basic structure underpinning a car, where the aim is clear and
specifications can be agreed on. An engine that might cost $1bn to develop,
for example, can be easily split two or more ways. Yet alliances work far
less well for broader technologies such as connectivity and autonomous
vehicles. It is harder to specify a common goal for a product that could find
its way into every vehicle the companies make. And it makes less sense to
share futuristic technologies that may prove to be the differentiating factor
for buyers of cars in the future.

  The arrival of new competitors such as Tesla, and deep-pocketed
tech giants intent on disrupting the transport industry such as Google, Apple
and Uber, make dealmaking an even more pressing need. "Everyone agrees
on the rationale for big mergers, even if execution of deals has been
extremely difficult up to now," says an adviser to the industry.

  If car mega-mergers are to go ahead, however, and stand a better
chance of success than past attempts, two conditions apply. First, the big
stakeholders--governments, families and unions--will need to be convinced.
Many carmakers, such as BMW, Fiat, Ford, Toyota, VW and others, have ties to
families, which in some cases have blocking shareholdings. VW's unions
or France's government, which has stakes in Renault and PSA, would
oppose deals that could result in big domestic job losses.

  Second, transactions will need to do more than simply chase
volume. A welcome new trend in the industry is to put greater emphasis on
profitability. One of GM's reasons for getting rid of Opel was to
concentrate on profits rather than solely on how many cars it turns out, a
decision that Tim Urquhart of IHS Markit, a research firm, calls
"groundbreaking and brave".

  A mega-merger would take similar courage, and car bosses tend to
be conservative and risk-averse. But after over 100 years of selling cars
powered by internal-combustion engines, the industry faces the huge wrench of
adapting to a future of electrification and self-driving cars. Software and
electronics are displacing mechanical parts as the most important components
of a car. A business focused on selling objects will have to start offering
ever more transport services. If carmakers do not take the plunge, an
alternative is that one of the technology giants with big ambitions in
mobility could try to buy, say, Ford, Tesla or PSA Group. For cash-rich firms
like Apple or Google, the cost of such an acquisition would be pocket change.

