Full Text: 
  How to improve prospects for refugees

  THE European migration crisis of 2015 quickly turned into a
morality play. Liberals lined railway platforms to welcome refugees, while
their nativist foes warned of chaos and terrorism. Lost in the row were the
millions of refugees who stayed in the developing world, unwilling or unable
to journey to richer countries. The boats disgorging Syrians and Afghans onto
Greek islands delivered one of the most serious emergencies the European
Union has ever known. But according to a new book, they were a sideshow.

  The starting point of "Refuge" by Alexander Betts and
Paul Collier, a refugee expert and a development economist, is the plight of
the 86% of refugees who live in poor countries. The outlook for most is grim.
Although the number of people displaced by conflict or persecution (including
those forced to flee inside their own countries) is at a post-war high of
65m, more salient is the length of their exile: about half the world's
refugees have endured their status for more than five years.

  Take Syria's civil war, six years old with no end in sight.
Most of the 4m Syrian refugees languishing in neighbouring Turkey, Jordan and
Lebanon cannot return home. But they struggle to find decent work or educate
their children in the towns and cities to which most have flocked (the small
numbers in camps have even fewer options). Any visitor to places like the
Bekaa valley in Lebanon will quickly see the hopelessness that sets in when
refugees are denied a stake in their own future.

  The UN's refugee body (UNHCR) has a legal mandate to help,
but it is chronically underfunded and increasingly irrelevant. Under the
prevailing "care and maintenance" model, the UNHCR and its partner
agencies act as surrogate states, keeping refugees in limbo for years. That
suits rich countries, which pay to keep refugees away, and allays the
economic and security fears of their hosts. But it creates lost
generations--the third generation of Somali refugees in the vast Dadaab
agglomeration in Kenya (pictured) now numbers 10,000--and does nothing for
the refugees who are not in camps. The big argument of "Refuge" is
that refugees should be given jobs rather than coddled as victims, and that
governments should harness the forces of globalisation and capitalism to
help.

  The authors' Eureka moment came in Jordan in 2015, when they
were shown a low-tax "special economic zone" (of the sort popular
in parts of Asia) near Zaatari, a refugee camp. The camp "reeked of
lives on hold", while the zone needed workers. The answer seemed
obvious: alongside nationals, refugees should be put to work. Done well, the
authors argue hopefully, this approach can align the interests of refugees,
donors and host countries. To test their ideas Messrs Betts and Collier have
helped establish a pilot scheme in Jordan, with help from Western governments
(the EU has offered trade concessions) and companies like Asda, a British
supermarket, which uses suppliers that hire refugees in the zone. Results so
far are mixed, although it is early days. Different solutions can be found
for other countries. In some parts of Africa, for example, refugees can be
given arable land to farm; Uganda has found success with this approach. When
peace returns at home, refugees can return. If it doesn't, after a set
period they should be allowed to naturalise.

  Where does the West fit in? The authors slam Angela Merkel,
Germany's chancellor, for triggering huge movements of refugees and
migrants to Europe by relaxing entry rules for Syrians in August 2015. The
charge is unfair. Mrs Merkel's decision was as much consequence as
cause: the exodus was well under way by the summer. A striking claim that
Germany's decisions "may have" intensified the violence in
Syria is presented without evidence.

  The authors are on steadier ground when they note the high price
of European generosity. Sweden, for example, has diverted half its
foreign-aid budget to pay for refugees at home; thus the world's poorest
are in effect subsidising their more fortunate brethren in Sweden's
expensive asylum system. The drain has lost Syria its brightest, crimping its
chances of post-conflict recovery. Rather than argue for rich countries to
take in ever more refugees, the authors urge them to offer political and
economic help to "havens" like Jordan and Kenya, including
financial incentives for firms to invest.

  This will unsettle those who despair at Europe's inability to
handle a refugee influx of 1m when its poorer neighbours cope with far higher
numbers. Perhaps a bigger problem is that "Refuge" provides no
guide on how to handle today's mixed flows of economic migrants and
refugees. Unlike many advocacy groups, the authors are careful (and right) to
distinguish the two. But the people smugglers in Libya who haul Eritreans
onto boats together with Nigerians and Bangladeshis do not, creating
headaches for European governments.

  "Refuge" suffers from poor editing; it is wearyingly
repetitive and dotted with errors (Mrs Merkel has not, for example, imposed a
cap on refugees). A few eyebrows will also be raised at the claim that
Europe's refugee flows were responsible for Britain's vote to leave
the EU. But this should not detract from the humanity of a book that places
the long-term needs of the world's refugees at its heart.
"Refuge" is the first comprehensive attempt in years to rethink
from first principles a system hidebound by old thinking and hand-wringing.
Its ideas demand a hearing.

  Refuge: Transforming a Broken Refugee System.

  By Alexander Betts and Paul Collier.

