Full Text: 
  The old Carrie Lam

  Carrie Lam's education policies will not defuse political
tensions in schools

  THE leader of Hong Kong, Leung Chung-ying, will not be widely
missed when he steps down at the end of June, especially by the young. His
five-year term has been dogged throughout by student-led protests. In 2012
thousands of high-school pupils demonstrated against what they saw as an
effort to teach them to love the Chinese Communist Party ("national
education", as the government called it). Leaders of the campaign were
back on the streets again two years later demanding full democracy. Their
"Umbrella Movement" was the biggest act of civil disobedience in
the territory's history and spawned new groups demanding
"self-determination" for Hong Kong.

  No wonder, then, that Carrie Lam, who was chosen in March to
succeed Mr Leung, is trying to win over the territory's youth. To be
successful, she cannot be seen as another Mr Leung. That will be tricky. In
her previous role as Hong Kong's top civil servant, she had to implement
his policies--and, by extension, those of the party in Beijing. Mrs Lam is
widely remembered for her obduracy in a televised debate with student leaders
during the Umbrella unrest (protesters watching her are pictured). As chief
executive, Mrs Lam will still have no freedom to propose political reform
unless China wants it. At a meeting in Beijing on April 11th with the
president, Xi Jinping, she at least had the gumption to tell him (or so she
later said) that "Hong Kong citizens passionately hope for more
democracy." China does not.

  Instead of dwelling on politics, Mrs Lam is trying to show concern
for students' welfare. Schools in Hong Kong produce admirable results.
But academic pressures on pupils are enormous. Last year Mr Leung's
government commissioned a report on whether academic demands were to blame
for a spate of student suicides. Many Hong Kongers were outraged by its
finding that the suicides were not directly related to the education system.

  Unlike Mr Leung, who supported rigorous testing of students even
at a very young age, Mrs Lam talks of a need to "reduce pressure"
on them. She has taken aim at a particularly controversial scheme, supported
by Mr Leung, for assessing the performance of primary schools. It involves
testing pupils but not telling them their scores: the results are only used
to grade the schools. It has resulted in heavy pressure on students. Last
year, amid an outcry from parents, the government suspended one form of such
tests. But it said it would introduce a new scheme this year that many
parents fear will be little different. Mrs Lam wants the testing to be
scrapped altogether. Mr Leung has curtly advised her that she cannot abolish
it until his term ends.

  During her campaign to become chief executive, Mrs Lam promised to
increase the annual budget for education by HK$5bn ($643m), or nearly 7%,
noting that government spending on this was below the average in wealthy
economies. She is widely expected to replace the unpopular education
secretary, Eddie Ng.

  But Mrs Lam's reforms will do little to ease older
students' political frustrations, including their resentment of the
Communist Party's insistence on "patriotism". Last month the
main advisory body to the parliament in Beijing urged its members from Hong
Kong to visit schools in the territory to talk about "national
conditions" (or the party's achievements, as many in the territory
interpret that phrase to mean). It said this would help to curb
pro-independence sentiment in Hong Kong. More likely is that students will
grumble even louder.

