Full Text: 
  After an encouraging first quarter, questions over regulation
remain

  WHAT a difference a year makes. When America's big banks
reported first-quarter earnings for 2016, the mood was glum. The Federal
Reserve was proving tardier than hoped in raising interest rates, which held
down lending margins. Jitters about the world economy meant rotten results
for investment-banking units, in what is usually their best season of the
year. Regulators added to the misery: last April the Fed rejected the
"living wills"--plans for liquidating lenders that get into
trouble--of five of the six largest banks.

  This spring bankers are happier. Business perked up last year
after that dismal start. Donald Trump's election in November,
accompanied by promises to ginger up the American economy, cut corporate
taxes and roll back regulation of finance, gave banks' shares a lift
(see chart). The Fed raised rates in December and again in March and is
likely to keep increasing them. And 2017's first-quarter results have,
mostly, seen an improvement--though the cheer was not evenly shared.

  "Wall Street activities have performed better than Main
Street ones," says Mike Mayo, an independent bank analyst. Revenues from
capital-market businesses at the five biggest Wall Street firms, Mr Mayo
calculates, rose by an average of one-fifth in the first quarter of the year,
compared with a year earlier.

  Underwriting and fixed-income trading were buoyant; equity trading
and advice were flattish. Morgan Stanley, the last big bank to report, was
arguably the star turn. On April 19th it said its fixed-income revenues had
almost doubled, to $1.7bn, apparently vindicating a thorough overhaul of the
division early last year. The firm's net income rose by 70%, to $1.9bn.

  The previous day Goldman Sachs had disappointed analysts, although
its net income was twice as high as a year before. Its fixed-income, currency
and commodities revenues were flat, also at $1.7bn. It also lagged behind the
field in equities. Volatility in the foreign-exchange, crude-oil and equity
markets was subdued: hedge funds (on which Goldman's trading business is
more reliant than its rivals) were consequently less active. Even so,
admitted Goldman's Martin Chavez, "we didn't navigate the
market well".

  Business on Main Street was more sluggish. Bank loans grew in the
first quarter by just 0.7% at an annualised rate, according to the Fed, the
slowest for almost six years. Commercial and industrial lending shrank for
the first time since late 2010. Residential-mortgage lending also declined.
But widening interest margins helped some banks, as loan rates went up faster
than funding costs: Bank of America's spread rose by 18 basis points
from the previous quarter and JPMorgan Chase's by ten.

  In such a quarter Wells Fargo, the least dependent of the big six
on investment banking, was perhaps the least likely to shine. Its net income,
at $5.5bn, was virtually unchanged from a year before and a shade up from the
fourth quarter. A quarterly increase in commercial lending was outweighed by
a decline in consumer loans, mainly mortgages.

  But Wells has other worries. It is still recovering from last
September's revelation that it had opened more than 2m ghost accounts.
It hopes that a scathing report this month by outside consultants, the
dismissal of several executives and the clawing back from them of $180m in
pay and shares will help it to recover customers' trust. It has some way
to go: the number of current (checking) accounts opened in March was up by 7%
from February, but 35% lower than a year before. Institutional Shareholder
Services, a firm which advises investors, has recommended voting to replace
most of Wells's board at the annual meeting on April 25th.

  Wells's woes notwithstanding, banks ought to be able to look
ahead in good heart. Rates are likely to rise further, America's economy
is in good shape and Wall Street firms stand to gain as Europe picks up too.
But a cheerful year is by no means assured. Mr Trump's tax-cutting plans
are not yet formed and the future of bank regulation is still unclear. Hence
the stalling, in recent weeks, of the rally in banks' shares.

  Bankers have argued that it is high time red tape was cut:
lending, they say, is being held back. Mr Trump is due to appoint several
regulators who may lift their burden. But his chief economic adviser, Gary
Cohn, formerly at Goldman Sachs, has mused vaguely about a "21st-century
version" of the Glass-Steagall act, the Depression-era law that
separated commercial and investment banking, repealed only in 1999. With no
details, bank bosses were coy in earnings calls with analysts, but
"Glass" and "Steagall" are not soothing words.

