Full Text: 
  The Lib Dems' focus on Europe could limit the Tories'
hoped-for landslide

  CAMPAIGNING as a Liberal Democrat in the 2015 general election was
not a happy experience, says Stephen Williams, a former minister for local
government. The party was disliked for propping up the Conservatives in a
coalition government in 2010-15 and for reneging on a pledge not to raise
university tuition fees. It scraped just 8% of the vote, down from 23% in
2010. "At times I felt like the most hated man in Bristol," Mr
Williams sighs.

  Now, though, things are looking brighter for the Lib Dems. Last
year no party campaigned to remain in the European Union so vehemently. And
now, none is likely to benefit so much from the vote to Leave. The
party's noisy opposition to the government's proposed "hard
Brexit" has helped it to notch up some spectacular swings in council and
parliamentary elections since the referendum (see chart). Meanwhile, it faces
only weak competition for left-leaning voters from Labour, which is under
catastrophically bad management (see "The opposition:  Hard work for
Labour").

  So the Lib Dems are optimistic about their chances on June 8th.
All 48 seats they lost in 2015 will be "in play", reckons Rob Ford
of the University of Manchester. A 10% swing to the Lib Dems would see them
pick up 40 seats, 25 of them from the Conservatives. They are unlikely to do
quite that well--partly because eight of those seats are held by the Scottish
National Party, whose vote is likely to hold up, and partly because the
Liberals' organisation is still relatively weak after successive local
electoral drubbings. But Lib Dem watchers guess the party could pick up more
than 20 new seats. Popular former MPs including Vince Cable, a former
business secretary, and Simon Hughes, a former justice minister, have said
they will seek to win back their old constituencies. Nick Clegg, a former
party leader and deputy prime minister, has confirmed he will stand again.

  Even before the EU referendum, strategists had talked of building
a reliable "core vote" among internationalist young urbanites. That
job has now become a good deal easier. Advertising the Lib Dems' support
for a "soft Brexit" is an obvious way to attract the 48% who voted
to Remain. In Bristol, where Mr Williams is running for the new post of mayor
of the West of England, he misses few opportunities to remind voters of the
Lib Dems' position on Europe. At City Hall he tells a crowd of
ethnic-minority businessfolk that Indian-British relations are "going to
be even more important if we go over the Brexit cliff." Tory pollsters
fret that a Liberal raid on Remain voters might eat into the
government's expected majority, with London and the south-west of
England, the Lib Dems' historical stronghold, particularly vulnerable.

  The party's position on Brexit has also helped it to win back
protest voters, who abandoned the party when it got into bed with the
Conservatives in 2010. Mark Pack, a Lib Dem strategist, notes that support
for close relations with the EU is now the "anti-establishment
position". According to a recent poll by Opinium, only a third of voters
now think that the party was wrong to have entered into coalition with the
Tories. Meanwhile, its appeal seems to go beyond Europhiles: since the
referendum the party has picked up more council seats in Leave-voting areas
than Remain ones.

  With just nine MPs, the Lib Dems have so far struggled to gain a
hearing. Some reckon that part of the reason why they have yet to see much of
an uptick in the polls is because most voters pay little attention to the
party until they are forced to by an election. The lacklustre leadership of
Tim Farron has not helped. He recently got some attention, but only by
refusing to say whether he thought gay sex was a sin (he later clarified that
he thinks homosexuality is not). Polling suggests that voters think he is
doing no better a job than Jeremy Corbyn, Labour's unpopular leader.

  But there is cause for optimism on both fronts. The party's
profile will rise during the campaign; the fact that it is the most strident
anti-Brexit party will attract television cameras, says Mr Ford. Even if the
party's national polling does not pick up, it will pour resources into
marginal seats, while other parties will have to campaign across the country.
Moreover, what the Lib Dems lack in leadership, they increasingly make up for
with boots on the ground. The party claims that its membership has doubled
since the 2015 general election, to more than 90,000. Opposition to a
"hard Brexit" provides them with a cause worth fighting for.

